!

I ITM

-~* HI

i>* I &
^B ^B
DE SACERD0T10


ST JOHN CHRYSOSTOM

Barbara ©nibersitg
mm
ANDOVER-HARVARD THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY
MDCCCCX
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
THE HAVEN FUND
FBOM THE BEQUEST OF
CHARLOTTE MARIA HAVEN

N. C.

Otantbtttrge iPatrtstic 2Eexts.
General Editor--A. J. MASON, D.D.,
MASTER OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
TTEPI IEPQIYNHS
(BE SACERDOTIO)
OF
ST JOHN CHRYSOSTOM.

T<5 owl avrrj fioi <f)alvTai t\vij tis aval Te\va)v Kai eirttmjfJU)

CTriOTrjiicov, avdpanrov ayeiv, to irokvTpoiraiTaTOv ratv £<OG}V Kai 7tol-

Ki\d>rarov.

Gregory of Nazianzus.

Ars est artium regimen animarum. Gregory the Great.

Give me the Priest these Graces shall possess; Of an Ambassador the just Address, A Father's Tenderness, a Shepherd's Care, A Leader's Courage, which the Cross can bear, A Ruler's Arm, a Watchman's wakeful Eye, A Pilot's Skill, the Helm in Storms to ply, A Fisher's Patience and a Lab'rer's Toil, A Guide's Dexterity to disembroil, A Prophet's Inspiration from Above, A Teacher's Knowledge, and a Saviour's Love.
Bishop Ken.

TTEPI IEPQ2YNH2
(DE SACERDOTIO)
OF
ST JOHN CHRYSOSTOM
EDITED BY
J. ARBUTHNOT NAIRN, Litt.D., B.D.,
HEADMASTER OF MERCHANT TAYLORS' SCHOOL, AND SOMETIME FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
CAMBRIDGE :
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 1906

Andover-Harvard Theological library Cambridge. Mass.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, C. F. CLAY, Manager.
HoiltoOtt: FETTER LANE, E.C.
eiaBgoto: 50, WELLINGTON STREET.
lewia: F. A. BROCKHAUS. KUto gorlt : G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS. ttombnp ant) ttaltutta: MACM1LLAN AND CO., Ltd.
[Alt Sights reserwd.]

PREFACE.
CHRYSOSTOM'S famous treatise on the Priesthood, though several times edited abroad, has been only
once separately edited in this country. It is now nearly two hundred years since the appearance of that edition. Like the present, it was published at Cambridge, and printed at the Cambridge University Press.
The main object of the present edition is determined by the guiding principles of the series of Patristic texts of which it forms a part. It is primarily intended to meet the requirements of Theological Students: and to such students, even if we interpret the phrase in the widest sense, the present treatise may be said to be of peculiar interest. It has been well described as a work ' full of counsels and warnings which the clergy of every age may study with advantage ' : and previous editors (Bengel and Seltmann, for example) have also aimed at adapting their commentaries to the needs of candidates for Holy Orders.
In the second place, it may be pointed out that the de sacerdotio forms, by its subject-matter, its treatment, and attractive style, a fitting introduction to the study of the Fathers ; and some of those who, without having any previous acquaintance with this branch of study, chance to take up the present volume, may thereby be induced to extend their knowledge of Patristic writings.

VI

PREFACE

In preparing this edition, which has occupied the scanty leisure of the past three years, I have received much assistance from various sources. To Dr Mason, the editor of the series in which the book appears, I am indebted for constant help of the most practical kind, and for continued encouragement at every stage of the work. The Managers of the Hort Fund, by their generous grant made in 1904, facilitated my researches among the manuscripts of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. M. Henri Omont extended to me (as to so many others) the utmost courtesy and kindness while I was at work in that library. Mr Vincent Benson, Scholar of New College, Oxford, collated for me in full both the New College and the Corpus Christi College manuscripts of the de sacerdotio. The Rev. T. Allen Moxon rendered valuable assistance in the correction of the proofs, and also in the compilation of the indices, a task which naturally involved considerable labour. For help of various kinds I am also indebted to the following : the Archbishop of Sinai, Dr Bigg, Mr E. W. Brooks, Dr A. E. Cowley, Mrs Gibson, Dr Kenyon, Prof. J. E. B. Mayor, my colleague Mr C. W. Mitchell, Dr Swete, M. TAbbe Toiton, and the librarians at Berlin, Munich, the Vatican, Vienna, and other libraries on the Continent. To each and all of those who have as sisted me in a first and no doubt imperfect essay in the domain of Theology, I hereby express my hearty thanks.

J. ARBUTHNOT NAIRN.

Merchant Taylors' School, August 6, 1906.

C*f-I

CONTENTS.

Introduction

PAGE

§ i. On the character, date, and genuineness of

the de sacerdotio

ix

§ 2. On some points in the teaching of Chrysostom which are illustrated by the de sacerdotio . xvii

§ 3. Other ancient treatises on Pastoral Theology xxix

§ 4. The style of the de sacerdotio . . . xxxii

§ 5. The identity of the Basil of the de sacerdotio . xxxiv

§ 6. History of the Text

xxxvi

§ 7. Bibliography ........ lvi

De sacerdotio

1

Appendix

174

Indices

I. Subjects

178

II. Scripture Texts

182

III. Greek Words

185

»

INTRODUCTION.
§ i. ON THE CHARACTER, DATE, AND GENUINE NESS OF THE DE SACERDOTIO.
JOHN, surnamed Chrysostom, that is ' golden-mouthed,' from the splendour of his eloquence, was born at Antioch about 345 A.D. He was baptised about the year 368, certainly before 370: and became an avayva>o-T7]<;, or reader of the Scriptures, at the same time. In 374 or 375 he went to the mountains near Antioch, where he spent several years as a hermit. In 380 he returned to Antioch : and in the Church of Antioch he served as deacon from 381 to 386, and as presbyter from 386 to 398. In 398 he became Bishop of Constantinople. In 404 he was exiled from that city, and he died in exile in the year 407 '.
The occasion which eventually led to the composition of the de sacerdotio is described at considerable length in the opening chapters of this treatise : and a brief statement will suffice here2. Chrysostom had been on the point of entering upon the monastic life in company with his intimate friend Basil, when he learnt that he and Basil had been chosen for consecration as bishops, though they were not yet even deacons. Chrysostom's deep sense of the weight and responsibility of the
1 For the chronology of Chrysostom's life see E. Preuschen in HauckHerzog Encyklopadie iv 101 -- in (1898). Gibbon's description of Chrysostom should be read : Decline and Fall ch. xxxii. Cp. also Tillemont vol. xi, and other works mentioned in § 7 (Bibliography).
2 Compare the account in DCB, article ' Chrysostom.'





'^ ,   5 \ \·55,  

5<     .    &,     \5  !      :       !  15  5·5 5 1.

"\   !   !   , <3  ^    ]   , ^   , \     ^    . , \     , 51 \5 !  ^    :  \3 \ ,  5   . 055   ! 51, <3 \3    . , \         55<1     5<3   !,  !   \  ! <3 .   0755   '5  \     < §.   5£§1! \ 5 , ^ 5  §,  55<3 5 15   555   :  £  ^ 51  ^^  £ ^  §155,        5 5 .
 ',  , 5      <3 ]55  &. ^     (3      (    6)  §     \ - <3 ,--,      ^, \5 ^   ^   5\, --    §               ^'  ' ' ,'         <3  <3<3

1  .   --4·

INTRODUCTION

XI

long before his time1. He takes, however, much surer ground, when, in explanation of his conduct, he enlarges upon the heavy responsibilities of the episcopal office, combined with his own unfitness, as the cause of his desertion of Basil (ii 7 to vi 13). In these eloquent and moving descriptions of the dignity of the priesthood lies the main interest of the present work : it is these which have given it its title irepl iepa>avvri<;, and which make it of permanent value to the clergy of every age.
The date when the events above described took place is probably 373 s; a year or so before Chrysostom
left Antioch, and entered upon that life of monastic retirement which, as we have seen, lasted until 380.
The date of the composition of the de sacerdotio is a quite distinct question : and from ancient times differ ent opinions have been held on this subject. Some have assigned the work to Chrysostom's diaconate (381 --386), others to an earlier period, that which he passed in retirement (374-- 380). It can, I think, be shewn that neither view is correct, but that the work was written after 386.
The evidence may be arranged thus : I. External Evidence
(a) hitherto available, and (b) first used in the present edition.
II. Internal evidence of the de sacerdotio. I (a) Socrates8, the Church historian (fifth century), and George of Alexandria4 (seventh century), tell us that

1 See note on i 5 (el Si oix iei kt\.) with regard to the question of

olKovoida, as Chrysostom calls such deceit.

2 This is the date thought most probable by Bardenhewer Patrologie"1

p. 283, Preuschen in Hauck-Herzog I.e., and Venables in DCB i 520.

Montfaucon places the date somewhere between 372 and 375 (see his

Monitum prefixed to the de sac.).

3 H.E. vi 3.

4 In his life of Chrysostom : see Savile's edition of Chrysostom viii 176.

N. C

b

Xll

INTRODUCTION

Chrysostom composed the de sacerdotio during his diaconate. On the other hand, Symeon Metaphrastes1 (tenth

century) assigns the work to the earlier period 374--380.

(b) Chrysostom himself, in a sermon2 preached at Antioch, the genuineness of which is beyond question,

refers to a work on the priesthood which he intends to

publish at a future date. This work cannot be other

than the treatise irepi Upw<rvvr)<; which we possess.

For not only is there no evidence that Chrysostom

wrote more than one work on this subject, but the

context of the passage in the sermon in question shews close similarity with the topics handled in the de sacer

dotio, as the following analysis of the passage will prove.

Chrysostom is speaking of the audacity of King Uzziah,

who ' transgressed against the Lord his God, and went

into the temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the

altar of incense,' and is led to speak of the office of the

priest as greater than that of the king : iepaxrvvq yap

Kao airf)? Tr}<; j3aai~\.ia<i aefivorepa, Kal p,eu^cov iarlv

apXV3- The throne of the priesthood is set up not on earth, like that of the king, but in heaven : 77? ravra

<p7](7iv ; <zi5to? 6 twv ovpavwv /?<z<rt\et;?- oaa yap av

StfcrrjTe, (firjcriv, inl tj}? 7179, e<nai Be8ep.iva iv toIs ovpavois' Kal o<ra av Xvarjre eVt t^? 7?Ji>> ecnai \e\.vp.eva iv tois

ovpavols*. Again, 6 Sea-irony? (i.e. God) eirerat t&> BovXa

(i.e. the priest), Kal airep av ovros Kara Kpivy, ravra

etceivcx; avco icvpol*. Then he adds aXXa irepl fiev iepea-

1 ap. Savile viii 378.

2 in illudvididominum v (one of the six Homm. in Oziani) 132 c-- 133 A.

The reference, but not the conclusion based on it, is due to Bengel

(Leo-Bengel p. xviii).

* Cp. de sac. iii r (notes).

* Cp. de sac. iii 5, where the same passage of St Matthew (xviii 18) is

quoted. B Cp. de sac. iii 5 airep av tpyavwvrai k&tu oi UpeU, ravra 6 #eis avu

Kvpot' Kal tt)v t&v 5o6\u)v yvihfiriv 6 8e<rir6rii$ )3e/3aiot. Note also the

similar use of 8eo"ir6TT]s and douXos in the two passages.

INTRODUCTION

Xlll

avvrjf, zeal oaov rrjs d£ta? to fiiyeOos, iv irepq) Kaipat hrjKoxTOfiev. Now the de sacerdotio (see footnotes) con tains a comparison between the priestly and the kingly offices, in favour of that of the priest: it contains the same quotation from St Matthew's Gospel, used for the same purpose : and it contains the same remarkable expression that God ' confirms ' above (in heaven) what the priest does, or decides, below (on earth). There seems to be no room for doubt that the treatise on the priesthood promised in the words irepl lepcoo-vvrj(;...iv ereptp iccupco brj\ojao/j.ev is the treatise which we possess.
II. The evidence afforded by the de sacerdotio itself supports the conclusion that it belongs not to the time of monastic retirement, but to a later period in Chrysostom's life. The maturity of thought and sobriety of tone which appear in this work, as contrasted with the characteristics of writings of undoubtedly early date, are proof that it marks a later development of Chrysostom's mind and outlook upon the world. This is particularly noticeable in what he says of the ascetic life of the monk1. Towards monasticism Chrysostom adopts in the de sacerdotio a critical, not to say an antagonistic attitude, which does not harmonize with the view that he was himself a monk when he wrote this work, but is entirely consistent with the view that at the time of writing it he had already abandoned the ascetic life and had been ordained for the ordinary service of the Church.
Thus external and internal evidence combine to shew that the de sacerdotio is later than the time of his retirement (374--380). It is also later than his diaconate (381 --386). For at Antioch, as we know

1 de sac. vi 5--7 (notes). 62

XIV

INTRODUCTION

from Chrysostom himself, preaching was not fart of the duty of a deacon : but was confined to the bishop and the 'wiser of the presbyters1.' Hence the sermon in question is certainly later than Chrysostom's ordination as presbyter. Bardenhewer2 places it in 386. Tillemont* and Montfaucon4 incline to place it later still, in 388.
Thus 386 is the terminus post quern for the date of the de sacerdotio. The terminus ante quern is afforded by Jerome, who, in a work written in 392, refers to the de sacerdotio as already known to him5. And we must apparently place the terminus ante quern earlier than 392 in order to allow the reputation of the book time to reach Jerome. Hence we infer that the de sacerdotio was written between the years 386 and 390.
The date of the work cannot perhaps be fixed with greater precision on the evidence now available. But if we may have recourse to a priori considerations, we shall incline to place the date at the beginning rather than at the end of this period (386--390). For the beginning of Chrysostom's priesthood was the natural and fitting moment for him to publish a work in which the high claims of the priesthood are so strongly emphasized, and its prerogatives so glowingly described. Again, this was also a natural moment for him to' set forth to the world the true motives of his action at the time of Basil's consecration. His own conduct on that occasion had --as we may infer from the de sacer dotio itself--been misrepresented : and he may very possibly have felt that now, when he had been called to the higher office of priest, it was desirable to

1 Homm, in i Cor. 19 b: iwel iced vvv rots ^tv d<p\ecrT£pois twv

TrpeafivTiptiiv touto (i.e. t6 fiairTlfav) iyxeipl^o/iey, rbv dk 5i5acrKa\ucbv \6yov

tois cro<puiripois : and, for the bishop, Homm. in 1 Tim. 599 D.

2 Patrologie1 p. 290.

3 xi p. 561 (ed. 1706).

4 Monitum to Homm. in Oziam. 6 See below, p. xvii and footnote 2.

INTRODUCTION

XV

strengthen his work and power for good by refuting the aspersions to which he had been exposed.
The conclusion, therefore, to which we are led byall the evidence before us is that the de sacerdotio was published shortly after 386, and most probably in the year 387.
The scene of the dialogue is laid at Antioch, the birthplace of Chrysostom, and, as seems probable, of Basil also.
The contents of the six books into which the treatise is divided are, in the main, as follows :
Book I describes the events (already recounted) which preceded Basil's consecration : also his visit to Chrysostom, and Chrysostom's defence against his friend's reproaches.
BOOK II describes the heavy responsibilities of the priestly office: and shews that while Basil is fitted for that office, Chrysostom is unworthy of holding it. Those who nominated him, instead of resenting his refusal of the honour, may congratulate them selves that he did not bring discredit upon them by accepting it and then proving his unfitness.
BOOK III sets forth the dignity of the priestly office, and the faults of Chrysostom's character, which would have entailed disaster to him and others. The qualities for which we ought to look in a bishop, and his various duties, are also described.
Book IV shews that the priest, or bishop, must be a stalwart defender of the faith against heretics : and contains an eloquent eulogy of St Paul in regard to his skill in expounding Christian doctrine.
BOOK V emphasizes the need of careful preparation before preaching.

XVI

INTRODUCTION

BOOK VI describes the duties of the priest as contrasted with those of the monk. The responsibilities of the priest are shewn to be greater, for the souls of others are in his keeping. The fierce character of the warfare carried on by Satan against mankind is also delineated. The book ends with a promise given by Chrysostom that he will assist Basil by his counsel in fulfilling the duties of his office.
It is not always easy to distinguish the various stages of Chrysostom's argument, which is somewhat desultory and is at times interrupted by digressions. He occasion ally returns to a subject which he seemed to have fully discussed already. Thus the Eucharist is twice described in much the same terms'; the same may be said of the contrast between the priest and the monk2, and the faults of Chrysostom's character3.
The genuineness of the de sacerdotio is attested by quotations made from it by the following authors :
(i) George of Alexandria (seventh century) quotes the passage in which Anthusa entreats her son not to leave her4. The citation is somewhat free, but pre supposes a text substantially as we now have it.
(2) Suidas (tenth century) singles out the de sacer dotio for praise on account of its admirable style and its lofty eloquence5. He also quotes from it two passages of considerable length6.
(3) 'Anonymus Scriptor vitae Chrysostomi' (after

1 At iii 4 and vi 4. 2 See iii 12 ---15 and vi 5-- 7. 3 See iii 8, 14 and vi 12. 4 i 1 : see Savile's edition of Chrysostom viii p. 1 76. 6 s.v. 'Iw&vvris : ol vepl Upuxrivris iirepfS&Wovcri X^oi r<f re iirf/ei Kal rrj <ppa<xei Kal t% Xei6Tijn ko\ t<£ irdXXei t<S» bvopjXTViv . 6 From iii 16 and vi 4 : see p. liv.

INTRODUCTION

XV11

950) quotes the passage which is cited by George of Alexandria1.
We also find references to the treatise in the following :
(4) St Jerome, writing in 392, tells us that he had read this work of Chrysostom. He knew Chrysostom by reputation as a prolific author2.
(5) Isidore of Pelusium (fifth century), a disciple of Chrysostom, says that his master wrought this treatise to such a pitch of perfection that all who read it saw, reflected therein, their own virtues or failings3.
(6) Socrates, the Church historian (fifth century) states, as we have seen, that Chrysostom wrote the de sacerdotio during his diaconate.

§ 2. ON SOME POINTS IN THE TEACHING OF CHRYSOSTOM WHICH ARE ILLUSTRATED BY THE DE SACERDOTIO.
(a) The dignity of the priestly office.
Chrysostom's deep sense of the dignity and import ance of the office of priest pervades the whole of the de sacerdotio. We know that such views were character istic of the Syrian Church : but they find in Chrysostom perhaps their most eloquent and convinced exponent. Yet he lays stress, not only on the dignity of the office,
1 See Savile ubi supra viii p. 300. 2 de viris illustribus 129: ' Joannes... multa composuisse dicitur, de quibus Trepi Upiaainn}$ tantum legi.' 3 Kp. ad Eustalhium 156 : oGtu)s auri]v (rijv Upucrdvjjv) Xctttws Kai iruKvus i)Kplfiw<sev , dare iravTas...(v rairr-Q to. oUcia evplffKetv KaTop0dfW,T& re xal aKiiniJuiTa.

XV111

INTRODUCTION

but also on its responsibilities. As Bishop Gore has well said1: 'Chrysostom is emphatic in asserting that orthodoxy is of no avail to justify a Christian body unless its priesthood is secured by proper ordination. But if he thus shews himself to be alive to the spiritual dignity of the priesthood, in virtue alike of its sacrificial and of its judicial powers, he is equally alive to its responsibility for individual souls, laying immense stress on the necessity for considerateness, for gentle and patient self-adaptation to the different characters and needs and weaknesses of men, whether of high or low estate.'

(6) The Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist.
None of the Fathers takes a more exalted view of this Sacrament than Chrysostom. At the moment, he tells us, when the bread and wine are consecrated, the heavens open and the angels come down to earth : and he quotes with approval a report that angels had actually been seen within the sanctuary at the time that the Eucharistic sacrifice was being offered. The greatest purity, he argues, is therefore required of those who participate in that service, while the priest who celebrates far surpasses in dignity, by virtue of that fact, the High Priest of the old covenant2.
1 The Church and the Ministry* p. 146. Upon the subject of the priesthood and so-called ' Sacerdotalism ' see also Moberly Ministerial Priesthood, with its instructive criticism of Lightfoot's essay on 'The Christian Ministry '.
2 de sac. iii 4. It ought, however, to be remembered that ceremonial is not all in all to Chrysostom. He thinks more of the spiritual inwardness of the priestly office : thus we are reminded in reading him of the words of Dr Moberly in regard to the priesthood : ' the formal celebration of the Eucharist may be the very highest of its administrative methods... yet priest hood itself is something more vitally inclusive than any mystery of formal executive privilege ' : Ministerial Priesthood p. 286.

*

INTRODUCTION

XIX

With regard to Chrysostom's doctrine of the Eucharist, there has been much discussion as to whether certain passages in the de sacerdotio favour, or do not favour, the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Thus, for example, he says to each of those present at the Eucharist : ' thou seest thy Lord sacrificed, and lying (before thee), and the priest standing over the sacrifice and praying, and all (around) reddened with His precious Blood.... He that sits above with the Father is at the same time held in our hands, and suffers Himself to be held and clasped by all who wish1.'
Chrysostom taught that there was complete identity) of the consecrated elements with the Body and Blood of Christ. But this language, alike in the passage just quoted and elsewhere, fails to support the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which tries to explain on the basis of mediaeval scholasticism the manner whereby the bread and wine became, upon consecration, the Body and Blood of our Lord. 'When the Fathers asserted,' says Pusey, 'that what is consecrated, and what we receive, are the Body and Blood of Christ, they mean this not in any physical or carnal way, but spiritually, / sacramentally, Divinely, mystically, ineffably, through the operation of the Word of Christ and of God the Holy Ghost. But in this meaning they do speak of the objective presence of the Body and Blood of Christ as following upon the consecration V
The Roman controversialists who cite this passage of Chrysostom, among others, in support of Transubstan tiation have been effectively answered by Cosin, Bishop of Durham from 1660 to 1672. 'We deny not,' he says, ' that some things emphatical and even hyperbolical have been said of the Sacrament by Chrysostom, and

1 de sac. iii 4. 2 The Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist (1853) pp. 46-7.

XX



5  : \   ^ \ 65'  \   -  \5   ' &,   5 5 ,  5      &)/   \3 ,      \ ·       ,   · &          : 
3.11       15;  \ 11<     .   5    ,  -    1~55  - -,   ·   , 51   8£5
&5   <3   § ^, ,  -5, 501 ^ §5  \11     55,  ?  ^1."     55§ 1       .     -   5]   5.
     1!53      ^     \1£   355§   ( 4)· ^ 5 ,  ,  5    . 5,  ,  5  §    ,  3  &    .   \   5         5    \>  3 $$.  15,  ,   5 ^ 5   '     ^    ' ': \ 5    -.   55   537   '  '  05 1)' ''   .    -1   55§ 5 ,  15  15

1   ^ /  $)$   . 8 (^   1676);  . \ / (. &.) .  . 7^3 ., & (  ) . 86 5.    &^ \£ ^      £       (.§.    4»  \ 8 &1>).    & (£/ (   (  TM  . 20 5.) 18   .

INTRODUCTION

XXI

possible to suppose that others also are, e.g. Tedv/iivov /cal Kelfievov, Trepurrv^acrdai. ical irepCKafteiv. Finally, Dr Mason points out that Chrysostom's glowing meta phors do not necessarily go any further than (for instance) Wesley's
' With joy unspeakable we feel The Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven : The altar streams with sacred blood, And all the temple flames with God1':
or George Herbert's 'At Communion-times, he is in a great confusion, as being not
only to receive God, but to break and administer Him2.'
'Neither Herbert nor Wesley held the theory of Transubstantiation ; and they had no fear (even after that theory had been formulated) of their words being understood to suppose it' Their object was to impress, not to define.

(c) Penitence, Confession, and Absolution.
Penitence, as a system of discipline, had its origin and sanction in the New Testament : and primarily in the promise of Christ to which Chrysostom, as we have seen, makes reference more than once. Several passages in the de sacerdotio recognize the need of penitence : but Chrysostom also insists that the priest must study the varying characters of men in order that his discipline may be effective3.
1 Hymns on the Lord's Supper Ixxxix; probably suggested by this passage of Chrysostom and its application of the story of Elijah.
2 Priest to the Temple chap. xxii. Cp. The Temple, poems on The Priesthood, The Invitation.
3 de sac. ii 4 (notes) and vi 4 ttoikVKov avrhv elvai del kt\. On Penance see Schwane Dogmengeschichte (Rom. Cath.) vol. ii p. 826, and Batiffol Atudes d'histoire el de thiologie positive 1902.

XX11

INTRODUCTION

In regard to confession, Chrysostom taught that it might be made either mediately, to the priest, or im mediately to God. Confession to the priest is implied in the de sacerdotio1, confession to God is alluded to in other writings : for example, the de incomprehensibili Dei natura, where he says, ' I do not bring you before an audience of your fellow-servants, nor do I compel you to reveal your sins to men. Unfold your conscience in the presence of God, shew Him your wounds, and seek relief from Him2.' Thus Chrysostom is not so strong an advocate of auricular Confession as e.g. Cyprian, Basil, or Gregory of Nyssa.
The power of absolution was entrusted to the Church by our Lord. Chrysostom refers to it when, after quoting the words in which Christ conferred the power of the keys, he adds, 'that which the priests do (have done) below (i.e. on earth), God ratifies above (i.e. in heaven): and the Master confirms the decision of His servants3.' The absolution in the de sac. consists (in the case of the unbaptized) in admitting to Baptism : or (in the case of baptized persons who have undergone penance) in re admitting them to Communion.

(d) Persecution of heretics.
Chrysostom held that heretics ought not to be perse cuted on account of their beliefs, but should by gentle
1 de sac. ii 7 ad fin. (notes). 2 de incomprehensibili D. n. v 490 C oiSi yap els Otarpbv <re 01711) rwr o~vv$o&\iav twv ffujv, ovSs tiacaXutpai toU dv&pthtrois avayKdfa ra dp.apn)pjaja' rb (rweiSbs avairrv^ov tfiTpoadev tov deov, Kai avr(p dci£ov to. TpaOfiara, Kal Trap' ciiJtoO to. (papp.aKa atrTjirai. 3 de sac. iii 5 airep av ipydffwvrai kA.tw oi iepeU kt\. (quoted above p. xii n. 5). Chrysostom seems to take for granted the justice of the priestly acts referred to, and does not mean to commit God to a com pulsory submission to what may have been an unjust sacerdotal act. See The Ancient Fathers on the Office and Work of the Priesthood^p. 15 (note).

INTRODUCTION

XX111

measures be brought, if possible, to the true faith. This view is expressed by him not only in the present treatise1, but also elsewhere2. It is somewhat at variance with the practice which he occasionally adopted of employing imperial decrees for the coercion of heretics and pagans3.

(e) The office of the Bishop.
From the de sacerdotio we may derive considerable information with regard to the office of bishop in the fourth century.
Some care is, however, required to distinguish between passages which refer to the bishop, and those which refer to the priest ; the same word lepev<; being commonly employed to denote both4. In the following analysis I proceed according to the order in which the topics discussed appear in the article ' Bishop ' in the Dictionary of Christian Antiquities.
i. Title. Besides iepevs we find 6 irpoaTarrr)^, 6 eViaKOTToi", 6 Trarijp''; besides periphrases such as 6 ttjv eiri<TKOTrr)v \aj(a>vs.

ii. Electors. We hear much of those who elected Chrysostom and Basil to the office which Chrysostom declined to fill. The electors, who are described some-

1 de sac. ii 4 : cp. Creighton Hulsean Lectures (on Persecution and

Toleration) 1 894.

2 de anathemate 696 A to -yap alpenxa S6yp.ara. . .dvafle/iaWfeic xPVt Kal

t4 d<re/37} Sdyfiara i\£yxw, fStray M 0ei8u> iyBpilnruv woifurBai, Kal eix^a8ai

itirkp ttjs afrrwv awrrjptas.

3 Theodoret, H.E. v 29, 31 : see also Puech St Jean Chrysostome

p. 103. We may compare the tone adopted in iv 4 oi tV ZaJcWuw

fiaivbfxevoL fiavlar, Kal ol ra 'Apetov \vttu>pts kt\.

4 See note on ttjs lepwaivris i 3. In Chrysostom's tenth homily on

1 Tim. iii (598 e) ItIvkotos is used, and ambiguity is thus avoided.

6 iii 16. We also have 6 wpoeartis iii 6 (note).

6 iii 15, 17.

7 iii 17, 17.

8 iii 15 (note), vi 8.

XXIV

INTRODUCTION

times as 'the fathers1,' sometimes as those 'who select' or ' who raise to honour2,' consisted probably of the metropolitan and the comprovincial bishops, in whom the choice was vested by the Council of Laodicea in 365. This Council, by denying the laity a voice in this matter, took the first step towards the ultimate practical extinc tion of really popular elections.

iii. Conditions of eligibility, (a) Status. It was laid down by the tenth canon of the Council of Sardica (343) that no one should become a bishop per saltum, but should previously go through the several offices of reader, deacon, and priest. At the time when it was proposed to make Chrysostom a bishop he was merely a reader (dvayvaxrTTjs). A similar exceptional case is mentioned by St Augustine (Ep. cxlii). Instances of deacons being made bishops are more common.
(/3) Age. The Council of Neo-Caesarea (314) in sisted that no one should be appointed bishop until he was at least 30 years of age. Special merits, however, and the precedent of Timothy, repeatedly set aside this rule in practice. Chrysostom, even if we put the year of his birth as early as 344, was not more than 29 at the time of the proposed consecration (373).

iv. Ordainers. Chrysostom seems to speak of Basil being consecrated by one bishop only3. Inasmuch, however, as the rule in the East and elsewhere required consecration by not less than three bishops, we may suppose that the one bishop mentioned in this con-

1 i 3 el|ai Tfl tG>v irariptnv Kplaet. For the word irartjp used to designate the bishop see above.
2 ii 7 Tu>v eXofUvwv, i 4 (perf.) tovs TCTipuiKdras. 3 i 3 rod fxtWovTos ij/jLas xeip°T°rfvetv i\66vros.

INTRODUCTION

XXV

nexion is the metropolitan : with him, in all probability, were associated some of the comprovincial bishops.
v. Place of Ordination. The consecration of Basil took place in Antioch1. From this we may infer that Basil's see lay within the province which had as its metropolitan the Bishop of Antioch : for at this time the metropolitan see of a province was usually the place of ordination of bishops whose sees fell within that province. This has a bearing on the question which is discussed in § 5 as to the identity of the Basil of the de sacerdotio.
vi. Removal by resignation. Chrysostom argues in favour of voluntary resignation of his see by any bishop who is conscious of serious guilt2. Examples of resigna tion are not wanting: for example, Gregory of Nazianzus, when archbishop of Constantinople, voluntarily resigned with the consent of the Council of Constantinople : so also Meletius, when Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia. At the same time the feeling of the Church ran strongly against resignation, as being tantamount to giving up work for Christ3.
vii. Removal by deposition. This is contemplated as an alternative to voluntary resignation in the passage just quoted from the de sacerdotio. The grounds on which deposition is based in this passage seem to be those general irregularities which affected all clergy, and therefore inclusively bishops also : we may note that the 58th Apostolic Canon deposes for negligence

1 The home of Basil was (at this time, at least) in Antioch : and the bishop came thither for the ordination (cp. 4\6ovtos in the previous note).
2 de sac. iii 10 £xPVv St-.-M-V irepiixtveiv rds ertpwv #tp/<reis, d irore avpLpaiT] KaOaiptaiv luavbv ipyd<ra<T$cu an&pnfp.a, ctXXct irpoXa^ivra iKfidWeiv iavrbv rijs apxv*-
3 DCA ' Bishop ' i 227.

XXVI

INTRODUCTION

in pastoral care. The special offences for which bishops, as such, might be deposed from their office do not seem to be in question1.
viii. The duties of a bishop. Those which call for notice in connexion with the de sacerdotio are the duty of preaching, the administration of discipline, the management of Church property, Church patronage, arbitration of lawsuits, and protection of the widows and virgins of the Church. The references given will enable Chrysostom's statements on these various subjects to be studied in detail. I will sum up these statements briefly.
(a) The bishop, according to Chrysostom, ought, if possible, to be a good preacher2 : and whether he be so or not, he must take pains with the preparation of his sermons. The high standard which he sets, and which he followed in his own practice both at Antioch (as presbyter) and at Constantinople, is in accordance with the duty of teaching, upon which he lays so much stress8.
(y8) In the administration of discipline the bishop took the lead, the presbyters holding a subordinate place under him, and forming his Council. The bishop, however, was the chief and ordinarily the sole judge in the first instance in cases of excommunication : and this is borne out by the de sacerdotio*; apart from a mass of other evidence.
(7) The income and offerings of the Church, and its alms, were in the first instance under the disposition of

1 DCA i 228.

a See book v passim.

3 DCA i 231.

4 This is assumed in de sac. ii 4, for instance: cp. iii 18 tL an tis X^yot tcls \u-rras as {nroixivovaa/ fylKa av W17 nra toO ttjs iKK\T)<rlas TreptxS^ai

7rX^pw^taTos;

\

INTRODUCTION

XXVII

the bishop, to be dispensed either by himself or by his proper officers : with, however, the general sanction of his presbyters. But the Council of Antioch (A.D. 341) forbids the bishop to deal with Church revenues without the consent of the presbyters or deacons: and orders him to render an account of those revenues to the pro vincial synod. Chrysostom dwells upon the necessity of taking precautions against a possible charge of mis appropriation of the funds of the Church: and his own later experience illustrates the importance of the advice1.
(8) The right of Church patronage was vested in the bishop. He, as a rule, collated to the benefices within his diocese, conferring, by ordination to a par ticular ' title,' the spiritual jurisdiction which drew with it the temporal endowments.
In filling up the various ecclesiastical offices which fell vacant the bishop was assisted by the body of pres byters acting collectively. According to Chrysostom the appointments to these offices were made at the ' public festivals ' : and often caused acute dissension between the bishop and the presbyters2.
(e) The bishop became a judge or arbitrator in secular causes between Christians : but only by the consent of both parties, and by an authority voluntarily conceded to him. This judicial authority, which attached to the bishop as a matter of Christian feeling, became gradually an authority recognized and enlarged by State law. Chrysostom tells us that it imposed a heavy burden upon the bishop, and exposed him to unpopularity with disappointed claimants3.

1 de sac. vi 9 (notes).

2 Jc sac. iii 15 (notes).

3 de sac. iii 18 (notes).

N. C.

C

xxvill

INTRODUCTION

(f) The office of protecting all that were distressed and helpless was assigned to bishops. Among these were included widows, virgins, minors, orphans, prisoners. Chrysostom describes at length the difficulties and anxieties entailed by the protection of widows1 and virgins2 in particular.
(rj) Finally, various other details of the bishop's duties may be briefly alluded to : thus he was expected to shew hospitality to strangers. The virtue of hospi tality is strongly inculcated in the New Testament, and was practised most liberally by the early Christians. Presbyters, and afterwards bishops, were specially ex pected to excel in this respect. Thus Chrysostom praises Flavian, bishop of Antioch, for keeping open house for the benefit of strangers and travellers, whom he entertained so generously that it might be doubted whether his house was the travellers' home instead of the bishop's3.
The bishop was also expected to visit not only the sick, but also those who merely desired to gratify their own self-importance by entertaining him. The descrip tion of the ordeal which he often had to face in such houses is vivid, and not without a touch of humour. Every trifling action on his part is carefully scrutinized : men scan his countenance, striving to read his thoughts : the very ' quality of his laugh ' does not escape notice, and if he bestows too genial a smile upon anyone it is likely to provoke resentment in someone else4.

Nowhere, probably, have the responsibilities of the Episcopal office been more fully set forth than in the

1 de sac. iii 16 (notes).

2 de sac. iii 17 (notes).

3 DCA i 785, alluding to in Genesim i 4.

* de sac. iii 1 8 1fii\ Si koX (SXtfifiaros ciBivas iirixoww kt\.

INTRODUCTION

XXIX

present treatise: yet no one, on the other hand, has described with greater eloquence than Chrysostom the privileges of that office, and the opportunities for good afforded to him who holds it

§ 3. OTHER ANCIENT TREATISES ON PASTORAL THEOLOGY1.
The de sacerdotio may be considered the most cele brated treatise, at least of those written in ancient times, on the subject of the priestly office and priestly duties. But Chrysostom is by no means alone in dealing with this subject. 'The majority of the Fathers,' as Dr Swete has said, ' were not only writers and preachers, but dili gent and experienced guides of souls2.' Thus Cyprian, Ambrose, Basil, Theodoret all have contributed to that body of Pastoralia which has, in recent years especially, done much to stimulate and encourage the pastoral activities of men placed in the midst of a civilisation very different from that for which those Fathers wrote.
The set treatises, nevertheless, on the pastoral life are not numerous. The most noteworthy are the defuga of Gregory of Nazianzus, the de officiis ministrorum of St Ambrose, St Jerome's letter to Nepotianus, the regula pastoralis of Gregory the Great, and the de moribzis et officio episcoporum of St Bernard.
1. The second oration of Gregory of Nazianzus, named defuga from the fact that it was written to explain his reasons for voluntarily withdrawing from the priest-
1 The most important passages from patristic writers on the subject of the priesthood have been collected in a work styled ' The Ancient Fathers on the Office and Work of the Priesthood' : London, Skeffington and Son, 1 89 1, which is an English translation of a portion of a work ' du sacerdoce ' : Paris, Viv£s, 1857.
2 Swete Patristic Study (Longmans) p. 178.
C2

XXX

INTRODUCTION

hood (in 362), though he afterwards returned to his duties, has long been regarded as closely akin to the de sacerdotio : for Gregory takes the opportunity of describing the importance and the responsibilities of the priestly office from the same point of view as that which we find in Chrysostom. An examination of the de sacerdotio and the de fuga side by side shews many close parallels and resemblances both of subject-matter and of phrase ology which can scarcely be entirely due to accident. Thus the topic of voluntary retirement1 is handled in both of these works in the same way : in both we find a list of the chief heresies2 prevailing in the fourth century: in both the suggestion that ill-regulated violence against any given heresy may drive us into a heresy of opposite tendency3 : in both a long and elaborate encomium upon the character and work of St Paul4.
The de fuga dates from 362 ; and the de sacerdotio (as we have seen) is about a quarter of a century later. The question of an indebtedness of the later to the earlier work cannot, perhaps, be definitely decided : but it seems at any rate probable that Chrysostom was acquainted with the de fuga". He probably knew of and sympathized with the action of Gregory of Nazianzus in resigning his see in 381, a few years before the de sacerdotio was written : and, if so, this sympathy may have turned his thoughts towards the work in which Gregory had defended in theory the action which in 362 he did not finally carry out, but which he did effectually carry out by his resignation in 381.

1 Greg. Naz. xxxv 407 sqq. (Migne) : cp. de sac. iii 10. 2 Greg. Naz. xxxv 444 : cp. de sac. iv 4. 3 Greg. Naz. xxxv 446 : cp. de sac. iv 4. 4 Greg. Naz. xxxv 461 --468 : cp. de sac. iv 6. 6 Migne (xxxv 406) asserts that both the de sacerdotio and the regula pastoralis (see below) are a mere expansion of the defuga.

INTRODUCTION

XXXI

2. The de officiis ministrorum of St Ambrose, in three books (date about 391), is a manual of Christian ethics which derives great importance from the noble character, wide experience, and statesmanlike views of its author. The form of the treatise is suggested by Cicero's de officiis, to which it presents an interesting and instructive contrast.
Resemblances to Chrysostom have been detected in a work de dignitate sacerdotali, attributed to St Ambrose1. This work, however, is spurious and of late date.

3. St Jerome's letter to Nepotianus (Ep. lii : date 394) contains an interesting discussion of the duties of the presbyters and monks of that time.

4. The regula (or curd) pastoralis* of Gregory the Great (Bishop of Rome 590 to 604) was written by him for the instruction of his clergy, and is of special interest to Englishmen because King Alfred thought so highly of it that he himself translated it for the use of the English clergy of his time. The original work, which at one time was given to every bishop at his consecra tion, resembles the de sacerdotio in the emphasis which it lays upon the necessity of the study of individual temperaments by the priest, and the value of a knowledge of human nature3.

5. St Bernard of Clairvaux, who died 1153, wrote a work entitled de moribus et officio episcoporum, which he addressed to Henry, Archbishop of Sens. The de consideratione also presents many points of resemblance to the work of Chrysostom.

1 See Bengel's notes to his edition of the de sac. (passim).

2 It has been edited (with an English translation) by H. R. Bramley

(Parker, Oxford) : and translated by Dr Barmby in the Nicene and Post-

Nicene Fathers.

3 See notes on de sac. ii 4.

XXXU

INTRODUCTION

§ 4. THE STYLE OF THE DE SACERDOTIO\
The treatise is cast in the form of a dialogue (on the model of those of Plato) between Chrysostom and Basil : but Chrysostom has by far the larger share allotted to him, and in the later books Basil is for the most part a mere listener.
The style of the de sacerdotio is highly elaborated, and bears clear traces of the care which Chrysostom took with its composition. Its long and often com plicated periods are constructed on the basis of the rules of Greek rhetoric. One sentence may be cited at length in illustration of this : KaOdirep yhp 01 awpdroov ipa>vre$, &»? [lev av Tfkrjcrlov elvai t&v epwfievmv e%fj, 'XaXeiranepav tov irdOovs ttjv ftdaavov e^ovaiv, orav Se a>5 TroppwTOTW rmv 7ro8ov/j.6V(ov eavToii<; dtraydycocn, ical tt)V fiaviav dirrj\a<Tav ovrco ical tois ravrr)<i eiri6vp,ov<n t?7? &PXVS' °Tav H^v 'ir\'r)0,Lov ai>Trj<! yevcovrai, a<f>6pi)Tov ylyverai to Kaicbv, orav Be airekirio-wo-i, ical tt/v iiriOvidav pxra rrj<; irpoo-$oici,a<; eo-fiecrav*. In this sentence we have as careful a use of Trapia<oai,<; and irapopolwcrii; as in Isocrates himself.
Other traces of the influence of the rhetorical training of Chrysostom upon his writings may be seen in the repetition of words for the sake of emphasis, and in the use of two almost synonymous words to express a single idea3.
1 In this and the next section I am largely indebted to a dissertation ' de Joannis Chrysostomi dialogo qui inscribitur irepl Upaxrivris ' by A. Cognet : Paris, 1900.
2 de sac. iii n (quoted by Cognet I.e. p. 75). Libanius, his teacher, confessed that Chrysostom would have deserved to succeed him as head of his school of rhetoric had he not been stolen away by the Christians: Gibbon ch. xxxii.
8 See note on ix.i.n\v koX tUrj i 1.

INTRODUCTION

XXX111

The frequent use of similes and metaphors is charac teristic of the Syrian school : and no one employs them more frequently than Chrysostom1.
The vocabulary of the de sacerdotio contains, as befits the elevation of the subject and style, certain words which are more frequent in poetry than in prose2. Here again we are reminded of Plato.
The treatise contains several references, which are here collected, to classical authors.

(a) Homer is once alluded to3 (but not by name) : and once a phrase is borrowed from him4. In a third passage it is possible that Chrysostom imitates a Homeric simile5.

{b) Sophocles may possibly be referred to in one passage": but this is uncertain.

(c) Euripides almost certainly suggests to Chryso stom a sentiment on the subject of invalids7.

(d) Aristophanes seems to be imitated in one pas sage8. There is some reason to believe that Chrysostom was fond of reading Aristophanes", who probably at-

1 Cognet I.e. p. 69. The similes in vi 12 are probably too elaborate and highly coloured for the taste of most modern readers.
2 e.g. Ka\aOpo\j/, <rK6ire\os, Trepldaupvs, a7»>ds, alviyp.6s: Cognet p. 68. 3 de sac. iii 9 (a K6ire\oi>) dv oi nvdoirotol TepardovTai : cp. Od. xii 73. 4 ditinw iKlxyra (vi 10) : cp. //. xvii 75. 1 vi u ico! dpriXajuirlru fiiv ii\lip tuv oir\uii 6 xa^K^ ' cp. //· xxii 135 (Cognet p. 69). 6 iv 4 rip oUehp |<0ei irepirapcts, possibly an allusion to Soph. Aias. 7 iii 16 Svadpeffrov ykp ol vogovvts : cp. Eur. Or. 226. 8 vi 12 eiau/MTJj xal aippiyq. : cp. Ar. Nub. 797. 9 Milton's Areopagitica (Ed. Cotterill, Macmillan) p. 6 : ' holy Chrysostom, as is reported, nightly studied. ..the same author, and had the art to cleanse a scurrilous vehemence into the style of a rousing sermon.' For the source of this statement see the Editor's note.

XXXIV

INTRODUCTION

tracted him by his vivacity, exuberance, and literary sense, however great the difference between them in other respects.
(e) Isocrates, Demosthenes, Thucydides, and Plato are mentioned by name in one passage1 as being, each in his own way, masters of prose style.
(/) Vergil seems to be echoed in one passage2, probably unconsciously.

§ 5. THE IDENTITY OF THE BASIL OF THE DE SACERDOTIO.
The following historical personages have been identi fied with the Basil of the dialogue. I put first the view which seems to me most probable.
(i) The Basil who became Bishop of Raphanea, a town in Syria not far from Antioch. This suits the conclusion of the dialogue where Chrysostom promises to visit his friend from time to time. In this there would be no difficulty if one was at Antioch, the other at Raphanea. We find a Basil bishop of Raphanea present at the Synod of Constantinople in 381, eight years after the probable date of the consecration of the Basil of the de sacerdotio.
This is the view which seems to have gained general acceptance. It is adopted, for instance, by Fronto Ducaeus, Baronius, Tillemont, Montfaucon, Bardenhewer.
1 iv 7 eyio Si ei fiiv Tty \«<5r?;TM 'laonparovs air-rp-ovv kt\. (see note). For Demosthenes see also notes on pp. 26, 1 and 69, 3 : for Plato, note on p. 17. »·
2 iv 6 t/s y&p t6itoj tt)s olKovfi^vr/s . . .tou biKaiov robs <x(?\ous -rfyvtrqcev ; cp. Verg. Aen. i. 459.

INTRODUCTION

XXXV

(2) Basil the Great, bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. This view is thought to gain support from a passage in the historian Socrates : but Socrates' words, rightly considered, merely prove that Chrysostom was intimate with Basil of Caesarea : they have no reference to the de sacerdotio. The great Basil, who was born in 331 (according to others in 327), was at least 13 years older than Chrysostom, and therefore could scarcely have been (as the Basil of the dialogue certainly was) Chrysostom's fellowstudent. Moreover the consecration of Basil as bishop of Caesarea would naturally take place at Caesarea, not at Antioch ; and if, as seems certain, the de sacerdotio was written after 380, it would scarcely have been possible for Chrysostom to exclude all reference to Basil's noteworthy episcopate at Caesarea (370-379) had the Basil of the dialogue and Basil the Great been identical.
(3) Basil, bishop of Seleucia, who took a leading part in the Council of Constantinople (held 448), in which Eutyches was condemned. This view was held by Photius1, who comments on the similarity which he discerned between the writings of Chrysostom and those of Basil of Seleucia. But this Basil, who was alive in 458, cannot possibly have been in his youth a comrade of Chrysostom, who was much senior to him.
(4) Maximus, bishop of Mopsuestia, who was ac cording to Socrates induced by Chrysostom to abandon a career of worldly ambition. No reason, however, has been given for the change of name from Maximus to Basilius. It is clear from the dialogue itself that the

1 Bibl. cxlviii iroWa yap txvV r&v ^Kelvov (XpvtroffTdfjLov) \6yuv Kcd votjfjLdrtov, Kai ftdXiara tCiv Kara ttjv delav ypafirjv, iv rots tou liaaiXelov \6yots tirHpalverai, cis &·> ci7ri rijs avrijs Tij-y^s tS>v iiaO-qixaruiv apvaa^ilvuv a/j,<pu tA Trp6<Ttpopa.

XXXVI

INTRODUCTION

circumstances in which Chrysostom deceived his friend were widely known and had been freely canvassed : and the change of name would have been quite purposeless. The distance between Antioch and Mopsuestia (in Cilicia) is another argument against this view, which has indeed nothing to recommend it.
(5) It has also been held that the character, and therefore the name, of Basil is a pure figment of Chrysostom's imagination. It is surely beyond question that the episode on which the de sacerdotio is based is an historical one, not merely invented : and so it has been taken by an overwhelming majority of those who have written on the subject.

§ 6. HISTORY OF THE TEXT1.
I. List of the most important Editions,
1. The de sacerdotio was printed separately long before the appearance of the first complete edition of the works of Chrysostom in the original Greek. In 1525 the editio princeps of the de sac.2 was issued from the printing press of Froeben, at Basle. It contained the Greek text, with a prefatory letter addressed by Erasmus to Wilibald Pirkheimer, the learned humanist
1 See F. W. Lomler Joannis Chrysostomi opera praestantissima Graece et Latine (Rudolstadt, 1837) Tom. i pars 1 (no further portion of this work was ever issued): the introduction contains a useful list of early editions of the de sacerdotio. Bardenhewer Patrologie2 p. 30J, Hoffmann Lexicon Bibliographicum ii 544 sqq., Fabricius-Harles Bibl. Gr. (Hamburg, 1802) viii 454--583, should also be consulted.
2 The title of the book is Quod multae quidem dignitatis, sed difficile sit, episcopum agere-- dialogi sex : Graece.

INTRODUCTION

XXXVll

of Niirnberg, and the host, friend, and adviser of almost all the scholars of Germany1.
The text of this edition is admirable from a typo graphical point of view. It has, however, no critical value.
2. The next edition is equally void of critical importance. In 1529 the publisher Rutgers Rescius brought out, at Louvain, a text of the de sacerdotio, of which the editor was Nicolas Clenard2.
3. In the two editions just named no mention is made of the manuscripts on which the text is based. In 1599 a step in advance was made, when David Hoeschel published an edition of the de sacerdotio3 based on the readings of certain specified manuscripts : viz. the Palatinus (in the Palatine library at Heidel berg), the Augustanus (in the library at Augsburg), the Coloniensis (at Cologne), and others of less importance. Hoeschel regarded the Palatinus and the Augustanus as especially valuable : the former of these seems to have disappeared, a fate which will not appear remark able to those who remember the vicissitudes of the Palatine library in the Thirty Years' war. The Augus tanus is now in the Hof- und Staatsbibliothek at Munich.
Hoeschel's preface is addressed to 'Albertus a Steten, Reipublicae August. Consul,' and from it we learn the

1 On Pirkheimer see Bp Creighton, History of the Papacy (ed. of 1903) vol. vi pp. 18, 19.
2 Quod multae quidem dignitatis, sed difficile sit episcopum agere : a Nicolao Clenardo. Graece. Lovanii per Rutgers Rescium.
3 S. Joannis Chrysostomi de sacerdotio libri VI. Graece et Latine. DCC amplius locis emendati aucti illustrati ope librorum MSS ex bibliothecis Palatina et Augustana. opera Davidis Hoeschelii. Augustae Vindelicorum [i.e. Augsburg] 1599. A life of Chrysostom occupies pp. 483--499, and notes on text pp. 500--539 of this work.

XiL

XXXV111

INTRODUCTION

principles by which the editor was guided in the for mation of his text. He states that he made a careful collation of the Palatinus and Augustanus, removing their errors, filling up their lacunae^, and appending an apparatus criticus which he had compiled from the readings of these manuscripts.
There is no copy of Hoeschel's edition in the British Museum ; and I have been unable to obtain one from any other source. However, through the kindness of my friend Mr Vincent Benson, scholar of New College, Oxford, I have secured a transcript of the most important of the critical notes, and I am satisfied that nothing of importance has escaped his attention and acumen.
The chief value of Hoeschel's edition lies not in the text, which seems to contain little to justify the some what confident statement on the title-page (see previous page, footnote 3), but in the marginal readings, derived from the manuscripts above mentioned. It should, how ever, be added that many of these marginalia are of little or no value, and that Hoeschel seems to have made no attempt to estimate the relative importance of his two best manuscripts.
4. After Hoeschel no separate edition of the de sacerdotio appeared for more than a century. But in 1610, eleven years after the publication of Hoeschel's book, there appeared the first volume of the great edition in Greek of the complete works of Chrysostom by Sir Henry Savile2. This work has justly earned for Savile a reputation as one of the most eminent Greek
1 ' (Hires) diligenter contuli, errata sustuli, lacunas explevi, lectionis varietatem annolavi.'
2 ToO iv &7/01S warpbt ii/uZv 'IfiANNOT ' Apxiewuncdwov KuvcmivnvovTriXews rod XPTSOSTOMOT tu>v evpurKo/j.ivui> T6/ioi wpQros kt\. Si ixi/xeXelas (col dva\o>p:iTWi> EPPIKOTtoO 2ABIAI0T iKwaXaidv avnyp&Qwv iKSodek. Etonae 1612 etc.

INTRODUCTION

XXXIX

scholars that this country has produced ; and in many respects it exhibits a scientific conception of the duties of an editor which it would be difficult to parallel until quite recent times. Savile spared neither labour nor expense to make his edition perfect. He gave occupa tion to a whole army of scribes, whom he engaged to copy the manuscripts of Chrysostom in the various libraries of Europe. He was assisted by many eminent scholars : e.g. Jacques de Thou, Andreas Schottus, Isaac Casaubon, Janus Gruter, David Hoeschel : and the in fluence of James I, whose interest in theological studies is well known, was exerted to enlist the active co operation of foreign princes and English ambassadors on behalf of Savile's enterprise. Every precaution was taken by both editor and printer --John Norton, the king's printer--to ensure accuracy. The preparation of the edition is said to have cost Savile £8000 : and, as a result, this sumptuous undertaking has been called by Hallam, not unreasonably, the first work of learning on a great scale published in England1.
Savile tells us that as the basis of his own text of the de sacerdotio he used that of Hoeschel : but had corrected it with the aid of two manuscripts at Oxford, one in the library of Corpus Christi College, the other in that of New College. The amount of new material that he utilized in the case of this treatise was thus comparatively small : but his extensive knowledge of patristic Greek, and his sound judgment, helped him no less in the de sacerdotio than in other portions of his edition. His text is one of the most trustworthy that has appeared : and I have never differed from him with out hesitation.

1 See the article on Sir Henry Savile in the Dictionary of National Biography.

xl

INTRODUCTION

At the end of the eighth and concluding volume of Savile's edition there are Latin notes, both critical and explanatory, on the de sac. They are by the editor and certain of his English friends--John Boys, Canon of Ely, Richard Montagu, and others.
5. While in England the edition just described was being passed through the press, the French Jesuit Fronto Ducaeus (Fronton du Due) was engaged in Paris on a similar task. His edition1, which included a Latin translation of the Greek original, was left unfinished at Fronto's early death : but was completed in six volumes by Federicus and Claudius Morellus. In 1636 an edition in twelve volumes was published, and this was reprinted at Frankfurt (1697), Mainz (1702), and again at Frank furt (1723).
Variant readings and notes, in Latin, are to be found at the end of volumes 1, 4, and 6 of the original edition. The Latin translation, which was by Fronto himself, was based on that of Germanus Brixius (1534). According to Fuller, in his Worthies of England, the Latin text was derived from proof-sheets of Savile's work, which had been secured by fraud. But though Savile's text seems to have been employed, there is no evidence that it was fraudulently obtained2.

1 The title of the fourth volume is : 5. patris nostri Joannis Chrysoslotni Archiepiscopi Constantinopolitani de sacerdotio libri VI etc. nunc primum Graece et Latine coniunctim editi--[edidif] Fronto Ducaeus, Societatis Jesu Theologus--Lutetiae Parisiorum apud Claudium Morellum 1614. See Seltmann p. xii : the number of this volume, according to Seltmann, was given as X in his copy ; this must be a mere misprint, for there was no tenth volume of the work until 1636.
2 See the article on Sir Henry Savile in the Dictionary of National Biography. But it would rather appear from Fuller's words that it was the Greek text of Savile that was thus used by Fronto. ' The papists in Paris had their emissaries in England, who surreptitiously procured this knight's [Savile's] learned labours and sent them over weekly by the post into

INTRODUCTION

xli

For the text of the de sacerdotio, Fronto used the Augustanus of Hoeschel, adding readings from two * Regii libri ' : of these one was bought by Francis I (this is styled by Fronto ' F ') : the other was bought by Henry II (Fronto styles this MS. ' H '). He also had before him 'membranae nobilissimi viri Fr. Olivarii' ('O'): ar)d the vetus interpretatio, which he consulted in the edition published at Paris in 1524 by Petrus Gromorsus. The editio princeps to which Fronto refers is not that of 1525, but the Louvain edition of 1529, which he usually cites as L or Lo.
6. In the year 1710 John Hughes, Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, brought out an edition of the de sacerdotio, ' typis academicis, impensis Edm. Jeffery V The book contains the Greek text of the treatise, with Latin translation. Prefixed to the text are valuable dissertations on the Christian priesthood : also a life of Chrysostom taken from Cave's historia litteraria, which had in turn been borrowed from the life by Savile included in his edition of the works of Chrysostom. Notes, chiefly of a critical character, conclude Hughes' work.
In the first few sentences of these notes Hughes explains the principle in accordance with which he had prepared his text ; he followed, he tells us, Savile's

France.... Then Fronto Ducaeus... caused them to be printed there with implicit faith and blind obedience... only joining thereunto a Latin transla tion and some other inconsiderable additions': cp. J. G. Scheidt de optimis Chrysostomi editionibus (Dissert.) Wittenberg p. 35.
1 Jeffery was a bookseller. The title of this edition is : S. Joannis Chrysostomi Archiepiscopi Constantinopolitani de sacerdotio libri VI, Graece et Latine : accessere dissertationes quaedam prooemiales de dignitate sacerdotali, item S. Chrysostomi vita e celeberrimi Cavii historia litteraria desumta. Editionem adornavit, praefationemque adiecit Joannes Hughes A.M., Collegii Jesu apud Cantabrigiensis socius. Cantabrigiae.. .17 10.

xlii

INTRODUCTION

edition, as being the best of all : but in a few passages he had adopted the readings of Hoeschel and Fronto. Occasionally he had differed from all three editors, and had used for the correction of the text the manuscript evidence accumulated by Fronto. Hughes' text is in no respect better than those of his predecessors : but in his notes he often advocates the true reading, and supports his views with considerable learning and judg ment.

7. It is convenient to reckon as an independent edition that of S. Thirlby, which appeared in Cambridge in 1 7 1 2 : but this does not profess to be more than a second edition of Hughes' work, upon which Hughes himself was engaged at the time of his death. Besides the de sacerdotio, however, Thirlby's edition of Hughes contained the oratio apologetica de fuga of Gregory of Nazianzus, the subject of this oration being, as we have seen, closely akin to that of Chrysostom's treatise on the priesthood1.
As regards the text, Thirlby tells us that the first two books, and part of the third, of the de sacerdotio remained unchanged. He had, however, taken steps, by a fresh collation of manuscripts--these manuscripts are not specified--to ensure greater correctness in the text of the remaining portion of the work.

1 The title of Thirlby's edition is : 5. Joannis Chrysostomi de sacerdotio libri VI. Graece et Latine: quibus dissertationes quasdam praemisit contra Hbrum falso inscriptum 'Ecclesiae Christianae lura Vindicata,' notasque adiecit Joannes Hughes A.M., Collegii Jesu Cantabr. Socius. --Editio altera, priore ilia emendatior et auctior: accessit S. Gregorii Nazianzeni eiusdem sedis Archiepiscopi de eodem argumento conscripta oratio apologetica. Opera S. Thirlby A.B., eiusdem Collegii alumni. Cantabrigiae, typis academicis, impensis Edm. Jeffery, Bibliopolae Cantabr. MDCCXII.

INTRODUCTION

xliii

8. We now come to that which is generally regarded as the standard edition of Chrysostom. I refer to the edition by Dom Bernard de Montfaucon \ a Benedictine monk of the order of St Maur. From 1718 to 1738 Montfaucon was engaged on this work : and considering his advanced age (eighty-three) at the time when it was completed it certainly bears testimony to his inde fatigable activity. There is no doubt that Montfaucon was energetic in the collection of new material : and a number of homilies by Chrysostom were for the first time published in his edition. His prefatory remarks prefixed to each treatise, and the life of Chrysostom with the diatribae, or dissertations, in his concluding volume, although of a somewhat unmethodical character, are nevertheless very valuable. It is, however, impossible to be satisfied with the way in which he has dealt with the problems of textual criticism.
For a long time scholars have been aware of the unsatisfactory nature of the critical side of Montfaucon's otherwise useful edition : and I am thus relieved from the necessity of demonstrating its inadequacy in regard to the text of the de sacerdotio in particular. I need only refer to the clear and convincing proof of Montfaucon's remissness given by Dr F. Field, one of the most emi nent editors of Chrysostom, in his edition of the Homilies on St Matthew2: and with this statement I entirely

1 It seems hardly worth while to give the long and rather pretentious

title of this work, which, thanks to reprints, may be found in most libraries.

2 See Field's ed. of Homm. in Matt. (Cambridge 1839) Praefatio

pp. xiii sqq. : thus (p. xiv) " 'codices non modo non contulit bonus monacAus,

sed interdum ne inspexit quidem...' ne unum quidem (codicem) nominatim appellat, sed 'unum,' 'duo,' 'alios,' hoc vel Mud legere monens, umbris ac

simulacris lectorem ludit" etc. For illustrations of the unsatisfactory

nature of Montfaucon's apparatus to the de sac, see Journal of Thiol.

Studies, July 1906, p. 588.

N. C.

d

xliv

INTRODUCTION

associate myself so far as concerns the present treatise. Montfaucon's reports of MS. readings are extremely meagre : he never refers to a MS by a designation which would enable us to identify it, but tells us vaguely that a given reading has the support of ' two,' ' three,' or more MSS. : his statements with regard to readings, where I have been able to test them (and nearly all of the MSS. he used for the de sac. have been in my hands), I have found inaccurate, often seriously so. Furthermore, while recording mere mistakes of spelling, of little or no significance, he omits points of real importance. The language and style of Chrysostom he had not sufficiently mastered, so that he is often led to prefer an inferior reading. In short, the critical part of Montfaucon's edition is that which it is least possible to praise.
The MSS. which Montfaucon claims to have consulted for the text of the de sac. are ten in number: viz. four Regii codices, nos. 1819, 1900, 1973, 2491: five from the library of the Comte de Seignelay (called the Bibliotheque Colbert), nos. 247, 248, 974, 3055, 3061 : and one from the library of the Bishop of Metz, Henri Charles de Cambout de Coislin (Bibliotheque Coislin), no. 262. Montfaucon also used the editions by Savile and Morell. The title-page speaks of ' codices anglicani' as having been also consulted : but there is ground for believing that these 'codices' are simply Savile's edition under a disguised and high-sounding name.
9. Leaving to a later section the reprint of Mont faucon which appeared in 1839, and following chrono logical sequence, we next come to Bengel's edition of 1725. J. A. Bengel, the well-known author of the Gnomon Novi Testamenti, in that year brought out a useful edition of the de sacerdotio, the Greek text being

INTRODUCTION

xlv

accompanied by Latin notes1. There is a strong flavour of Lutheran theology in these notes, and the contrast between this edition and Seltmann (as to whom see further on) is instructive and occasionally entertaining. It need hardly be said that the scholarship shewn in Bengel's observations is sound and thorough. He also added a Latin translation.
From Bengel himself we learn little as to the method which he followed in constituting his text. He speaks in general terms of having used the best of the manu scripts of early date. He praises the Augustanus (of which he made a fresh collation), but regards the Palatinus as interpolated. The version by the vetus interpres he has used with care, as ' perhaps older than all existing manuscripts.' Montfaucon's edition was also utilized by him, but only for the notes and the sixth book of the text : he had been unable to procure a copy of vol. i earlier, though it was published seven years before.
We have, however, from Leo (see the next section) who prepared the second edition of Bengel's work, the statement that Bengel's practice was to choose the ' middle reading ' in case of a difference between several manuscripts. He adds that Bengel used as the basis of his text the edition of 1525.
Bengel's principle of preferring the reading that seemed to be the mean between conflicting readings may not indeed commend itself to us. It did not

1 Johannis Chrysostomi de sacerdotio libri sex graece et latine. Utrinque recogniti et notis indicibusque audi, eo maxime consilio ut coenobiorum Wirtembergicorum alumni, et ceteri qui Novo Testamento Graece imbuli sunt, ad scriptores ecclesiasticos suavi gustu invitentur facilique methodo praeparentur. Opera Io. Alberli Bengelii. Stutgardiae 1725. Besides the revised edition by Leo (see below) there have been many reprints of Bengel in the stereotyped Tauchnitz edition (in 1825, 1865, 1872, 1887, 1900).
d2

xlvi

INTRODUCTION

escape attack in earlier days. But most will probably agree with Leo that Bengel shewed sound critical judgment1. His knowledge of the Greek Fathers was considerable: and though he contributed little to our knowledge of manuscript evidence he made a judicious choice, on the whole, among the readings known to him.
10. We can now pass to Leo's work, published at Leipzig in 18342. This is a revised edition of Bengel; but with additional notes by Leo himself, and without the Latin translation which Bengel had appended. The text is in the main that of Bengel ; Leo contented himself with a few alterations, mostly of small import ance. He also made no fresh collations of manuscripts.

11. In 1837 F. W. Lomler edited at Rudolstadt selected works of Chrysostom3, including the de sacerdotio. Of more importance than the text is the intro duction, which gives a valuable list of the early editions of the treatise.
12. In 1839 appeared the first volume (containing inter alia the de sacerdotio) of a revised Benedictine edition4. The publishers were Gaume Freres : the editor was Theobald Fix, who has set forth with great clearness the improvements introduced into Montfaucon's text in this recension.
The most important assistance was derived from Savile's edition : and the editor explicitly states the

1 Leo Praefatio (to his edition) p. ix. 2 Johannis Chrysostomi de sacerdotio libri VI. Ex recensione Bengelti cum eiusdem prolegomenis, animadversionibus integris et indicibus, edidit suasque notas adiecit Aenotheus Eduardus Leo. Lipsiae 1834. 3 Joannis Chrysostomi opera praestantissima Craece et Latine. Rudol stadt 1837. Tom. i, Pars 1 was all that appeared of this work. 4 This revised edition will be referred to in future by the designation Bened.2

INTRODUCTION

xlvii

value which he came to attach to the work of the English scholar, which he had at first rated less highly. The passage, which is quoted below1, will be found instructive by those who may still doubt the superiority of Savile's text to that of Montfaucon.
In regard to the de sacerdotio the editor of the revised Benedictine edition rendered a valuable service to scholars by publishing very full and accurate colla tions of three manuscripts, Parisinus 492, Parisinus 799 and codex Passioneus. These collations may be found at the end of the first complete volume (i.e. of vol. [pars altera) of the edition.

13. In Migne's Patrologia Graeca, Chrysostom's works occupy volumes 47 to 64. The de sacerdotio is in volume 48. There is nothing to indicate what new MSS., if any, were consulted. Montfaucon's list of ten MSS. is merely reprinted, and the critical notes are almost entirely based on Montfaucon, though supple mented by readings from Savile.

14. In 186 1, Fr. Diibner2, who had assisted Th. Fix in the labour of re-editing Chrysostom in the Benedictine edition, published a volume of selections from Chrysostom in the Firmin Didot series. It was to have been followed by volumes containing select works of other Greek

1 Benedictine (revised) edition of 1839: vol. xiii, p. iii of Epilogus Novae Editionis: Is (usus editionis Savilii) per universa volumina diwdecim Montfauconia.no operi incredibiliter profuit : sed quominus ab ipso statim initio et ubique penitus omnia ex Saviliana transumerentur quibus emendari potuerit Chrysostomus, obstitit primo disertum testimonium Benedictinorum de melioribus et copiosioribus subsidiis ex quibus se...orationem Chrysostomicam constituisse profitentur etc.... Maiorem ei (Savilio) procedente opere auctoritatem, evidentibus documentis tandem cedentes, debebamus tribuere.
2 S. Joannis Chrysostomi opera selecta Graece et Latine : vol. i, Paris 1861.

xlviii

INTRODUCTION

Fathers, with Latin versions ; but the enterprise did not get beyond the volume just mentioned.
Dubner tells us that he consulted, for the text of the de sacerdotio, four manuscripts ; of these, three were of the tenth century, the remaining manuscript of the eleventh century.
The manuscripts used by him include Parisinus 492 and Parisinus 799, of which full collations were (as stated) published in 1839.
15. In 1867 D. Euelpides published at Athens the first part of a projected edition of the de sacerdotio, consisting of the first book with an introduction. This edition I have not seen. There is no copy in the British Museum.
16. In 1887, Carl Seltmann1 edited the de sacerdotio with notes, chiefly of a homiletic tendency, for the use of Roman Catholic Seminaries. He made no independent investigation of the manuscripts ; but his notes contain a useful statement of the readings adopted by the early editors, and of the manuscripts which support those readings.
17. The text of the present edition is based on a fresh survey of old, and on a collection of much new material. Of this new material the larger part was amassed during a visit to Paris in December 1904, when I had the opportunity of examining the treasures of the Bibliotheque Nationale. The richness of that library in manuscripts of the de sacerdotio will be seen from the following list.
The evidence which we possess as to the original

1 Des hi. Johannes Chrysoslomus rrepl Uptaaivris \&yoi ££--de sacerdotio libri sex: mit anmerkungen neu herausgegeben von Carl Seltmann. Munster und Paderborn 1887.

INTRODUCTION

xlix

form of the text of the de sacerdotio is of three kinds :
viz. (i) manuscripts, (2) citations found in later writers,
and (3) translations into other languages.
I. Manuscripts.
The following MSS. have been used in the present
edition :
a = Codex Augustanus: once at Augsburg (Augusta Vindelicorum), now in the Hof- und Staatsbibliothek at Munich, where it is cod. graec. monac. no. 354. Saec. xi parch. The de sac. occupies foil. 140-- 207. See Ign. Hardt Catalogus codicum MSS. graecorum Bibliothecae Regiae Bavaricae (Munich 18 10) vol. iv pp. 22--27. This is one of the MSS. to which Hoeschel attached most importance (see list of editions, no. 3 above). A number of its readings is quoted by him. I have added others which were supplied to me by the courtesy of the Director of the Munich Library. See also E. Nestle Bengel als Gelehrter (1893) p. 35.
b = Codex Palatinus. I am unable to trace this manuscript. Hoeschel, as we have seen, used it for his edition, and his report of its readings is the only information that I have been able to use. In 1599, when he wrote, it was in the library at Heidelberg. It is not in the Universitats-Bibliothek of that town at the present time : nor does it appear to be among the Palatine mss. in the Vatican Library.
f=Cod. Reg. 492. Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris1. Saec. x ('copie' en 910'), parch. 316 foil. The de sac. is contained in foil. 240 --316. Omont further designates this Ms. as Fontebl. Reg. 2290. A full collation of its readings will be found at the end of vol. i of the Benedictine edition of 1839 (Bened.2).
</=Cod. Reg. 581. Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. Saec. xi parch. 256 foil. Of the de sac. this MS. contains (in foil. 119-- 139) only a fragment, consisting of part of the fifth and the whole of the sixth book. Omont adds the designation Colbert 418.
£=Cod. Reg. 765 A. Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. Saec. xi. parch. This MS. appears twice in Omont's Index ; once, correctly, as 765 A, but also as 565 A, a number to which there is no corresponding entry in the text of Omont's work.
1 For the MSS. in the Bibliotheque Nationale see H. Omont Inventaire sommaire des manuscrits grecs de la Bibliothique Nationale Paris 1898. I may add that while I have consulted most of the MSS. of the ixth to the Xllth cent, in that library, I have not had time to examine any of later date.

1

INTRODUCTION

Also, the de sac. does not occupy foil. 40--80, as stated by Omont, but foil. 1 --75. The MS. has been unintelligently handled by the binder. Fol. 75 ends with the words heinvvra \6x»vs (vi 12).
/=Cod. Reg. 799. Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. Saec. xii parch, peint. 395 foil. The de sac. occupies foil. 1 --87 r. A full collation is given at the end of Bened.2 vol. i.
£-=Cod. Reg. 800. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 310 foil. In Omont libri iv should be libri vi. The de sac, which is complete, occupies foil. 1 --64.
h = CoA. Reg. 801. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 427 foil. Contains the de sac. in foil. 3--"]},. Omont also styles it Colbert 974. This is one of the MSS. consulted by Montfaucon.
z = Cod. Reg. 802. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 309 foil. Contains the de sac. in foil. 2--68 r. Also styled Colbert 247. It was used by Montfaucon.
£ = Cod. Reg. 803. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 298 foil. Contains the de sac. in foil. 2--72. Also styled Colbert 248 : used by Montfaucon.
/=Cod. Reg. 804. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 698 foil. Contains Bks iii --vi of the de sac. in foil. 1 -- 104. It came from Constantinople.
m = Cod. Reg. 805. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi ('is codex manu Manuelis presbyteri anno 1064 exaratus est') : parch. 236 foil. : is also styled Reg. 2351. The de sac. is contained in foil. 1 --66r. The MS. came from Chios.
» = Cod. Reg. 806. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xii parch. 321 foil, peint. Also styled Hurault-Reg. 18 19. The de sac. is contained in foil. 1 --48. Used by Montfaucon.
o = Cod. Reg. 807. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 279 foil. Also styled Fontebl. Reg. 2354. It contains a fragment from the end of Bk vi (in foil. 1 -- 5 r.).
/ = Cod. Reg. 812. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 249 foil.: also styled Colbert 3055. It contains the de sac. in foil. 196 v.-- 249. It was used by Montfaucon.
q = Cod. Reg. 813. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 244 foil.: also styled Mazarin-Reg. 1973. It contains in foil. 223 -- 244 the first three books of the de sac. : the end of book ii and the beginning of book iii are mutilated. Of book vi only a fragment remains. This manuscript was used by Mont faucon.
r=Cod. Reg. 1024. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xii parch. 304 foil. : also styled Colbert 3061. It contains the de sac. in foil. 2-- 108 r.: it was used by Montfaucon.

INTRODUCTION

11

j = Cod. Reg. 1181. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xii --xiii (copie- par Nicolas), parch. 228 foil. : also styled Trichet-Dufresne-Reg. 2350. Contains the de sac. in foil. 50-- 160.
/=Cod. Coislinianus 61. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 319 foil.: contains the de sac. in foil. 1 -- 131 r.
« = Cod. Coislinianus 245. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. xi parch. 218 foil. : contains in foil. 1 -- 56 the de sac. with the beginnings of the books mutilated.
·w=Cod. Coislinianus 246. Bibl. Nat., Paris. Saec. x parch.
275 foil, ('copie' par le moine Jean') : contains the de sac. in foil. 1 --79.
x= Codex Passioneus. The manuscript breaks off at Montf. 379 A 11 (Bk ii 7):
a full collation of the part that is preserved may be found in Bened.2 vol. i.
_y = Cod. Collegii Corporis Christi Oxon. : in C.C.C. Oxford. Saec. xiii parch. 140 foil. Coxe Catalogus codicum MSS. in Collegiis Aulisque Oxonn. pars 2 p. 5 n. 21. This MS. was used by Savile ; who, however, does not specify it by name in recording his readings. I owe a full collation of it to my friend Mr Vincent Benson. For the marginal readings in this MS., which are numerous, I have used the symbol y'.
^· = Cod. Novi Collegii Oxon.: in New College, Oxford. Saec. xii
parch. 360 foil. Coxe ubi supra pars 1 p. 23 no. 79. Savile used this MS. also : my collation of it is by Mr V. Benson.
Berl= Codex Berolinensis : in the Konigliche Bibliothek, Berlin. It is cod. 354 Ham. : see p. 232, no. 403 of the CatalogusVerzeichniss (Berlin 1897). Saec. xii parch, foil. 274. A quaternion is missing after fol. 8. The de sac. occupies fol. 1 r to 1 1 8 v. I have ascertained the readings of some 30 passages in this MS.
Franc-- Codex Franciscanus. It belonged to Francis I, king of France, and was used by Fronto Ducaeus, who styled it Fr. I have not been able to trace it.
I/enr=Codex Henricianus. It belonged to Henry II, king of France, and was used by Fronto, who styled it H. Present whereabouts unknown.
Marg= Codex Margunii. This belonged to Maximus Margunius, bishop of Cythera, who corresponded with Savile. We possess only one or two of its readings, which are given in the early editions.
Olio = Codex Olivarii. Fronto, who used this MS., and styled it O, refers to it as 'membranae nobilissimi viri Fr. Olivarii.' Present whereabouts unknown.

Hi

INTRODUCTION

Sin = Codex Sinaiticus: in the library of the monastery on Mt Sinai. Gardthausen Catal. codicum graecorum Sinaiticorum (Oxford 1886) no. 375. Saec. ix (it is dated 893 a.d.) parch. I owe my knowledge of the readings of this MS. to the kind ness of Archbishop Porphyrios.
There are several other MSS. of the de sac. at Florence1, Rome2, Venice3, and Vienna* which seem to be of importance. I regret that I have been unable to make satisfactory arrangements for an examination of their readings.
Owing, no doubt, to the popularity of the de sac. and the consequent multiplication of copies, the lines of demarcation between the MSS. are not so clearly marked as in the case of some other authors. But the following groups seem to be distinguishable5. They are, in order of excellence, as follows:
Group 1 contains a, f,p. ,, 2 ,, b, d, e, h, k, I, o, q, s, t, z, henr. 3 » g,ir,w,y. ,, 4 ,, c, m, n, u, x, berl, franc, marg, oliv, sin.
In group i, a is better than f or p, and seems to me to be the best single MS. of the de sac.

1 See Baudin's Catalogue of the Laurentian Library I pp. 251, 458, 505. The most important ms. seems to be that numbered pluteus 11 cod. 9 (no. 25).
2 There are four MSS. of relatively early date (xi century) in the Vatican Library: viz. Vatic. Palat. gr. 15, 72, 553, 570. The first of these is perhaps the most important, as it seems that the text of the editio princeps is derived from this MS. For this information I am indebted to Father Ehrle.
3 In the Library of San Marco there are three MSS. (105, 107, 108). 4 In the Kaiserl. und Konigliche Bibliothek there are three fairly old ('ziemlich alte') MSS. of the de sac. : viz. Theol. gr. 64, in, 148. The last is imperfect. See Nessel's Catalogue I 192, 226 : Lambecius Commentarii de Bibl. Caesarea Vindobonensi II 787. 5 For a fuller discussion of the mss. of the de sac. see an article in the Journal of Theological Studies, July 1906, pp. 575--590.

I

INTRODUCTION

HH

In group 2 there is a close affinity between b and henr. Also between h, t, z. In h there are elements in common with group 4.
In group 3 there is a noteworthy harmony between its component MSS., so that in this group there is greater uniformity of reading than in other groups. The readings, however, are inferior, and not seldom bear traces of interpolation.
In group 4, c, x, berl, and sin, have elements in common with group 3. In group 4 we may also place the marginal readings of y (_/), with which the readings of the vulgate text (Montfaucon's edition) often agree.
In a number of cases, groups 1, 2, 3 are combined together against 4 : and in such cases the reading of the three groups is usually preferable. The combination of the groups 2, 3 seems to present better readings than that of groups 1, 4, in the not very frequent cases where these respective combinations occur.
The readings of the MSS. of group 3 are often, as has been said, identical. It seemed desirable to have a symbol to represent the consensus of these MSS.: and in this edition the symbol adopted is G (from g, the first MS. in this group). Similarly in group 4, the symbol C is used to denote the consensus of the MSS. c, m, n, u, x, which often give identical readings. As in previous volumes of this series, an asterisk is used to denote the first hand of a MS., the figure 1 to denote the corrector's hand, e.g. y*, y1. For convenience the readings of Montfaucon's edition of 17 18 have been cited as Vulg.

II. Citations from the de sac. in later writers. The following writers quote passages from the de sacerdotio :
Anon. = Anonymus Scriptor Vitae S. Chrysostomi (later than 950 a.d.) : see Savile's edition viii p. 299. The passage

liv

INTRODUCTION

quoted is from Anthusa's appeal to her son. It begins KaB'uraaa 7r\rj<riov (i 2) and ends with fvSoiu/ijjo-ewy i£ "<rrjs e'fioi,
Georg. = Georgius Alexandrinus (seventh century) : Savile viii p. 167. The passage quoted begins Kadla-aa-a irXrja-iov (i 2), as above, and ends ovtos 6 8eo^i6r (cai-f^cro) <re irpbs rffias. This citation is of little value for critical purposes, being more of the nature of a paraphrase.
Suidas1 quotes two passages from the de sac, which he embodies together in one long quotation, viz. (1) iii 16 iworja-ov ovv otto'wv Tiva k.t.X. and (2) vi 4 iroiKikov avrov clvai 8« k.t.X.
5y»z. = Symeon Metaphrastes (tenth century): Savile viii. p. 376. The passage cited begins eirel yap rjaOtro (of Anthusa) i 2, and ends evdoKifir]<rca>s i( 1017s ijioi.

Til. Ancient translations of the de sacerdotio.
(a) Syriac. The following Syriac MSS. in the British Museum contain versions of portions of the de sac. I have given the references by the numeration of Montfaucon.
1. Add. 14,612 = Catal. 753. 1. e. Saec. vi or vii. Contains the first book, which begins on fol. 53 v. of the MS. (Montf. 362 A 1 to 371 B 2).
2. Add. i4,6i2 = Catal. 753. 1. k. Saec. vi or vii. Contains discontinuous extracts from book iii, beginning on fol. 73 v. (Montf. 382 C 13 to 394 E 1).
3. Add. i7,i73 = Catal. 762. 18. Saec. vii ('ut videtur'). Contains an extract from book iii, beginning on fol. 145 v. (Montf. 390 A 2 to 390 C 1).
4. Add. 17,191 = Catal. 864. 30. b. Saec. ix--x. A palimpsest: contains on fol. 43 v. sqq. an extract from book iv (Montf. 403 D 5 to 404 A 1).
5. Add. 17,193 = Catal. 861. 13, 14. Saec. ix (it is dated 874 A.D.). Contains on fol. 5 v. sqq., an extract from book vi (Montf. 430 B 8 to 430 C 4).
6. Add. i8,8i7 = Catal. 801. 3. b. Saec. ix. Contains an extract from book vi, beginning oh fol. 71 r. (Montf. 434 C 11 to 434 D 4).

1 s.v. 'ludvvtjs, ' Amoxetis : Gaisford's Suidas vol. i p. 1787. Neither the source of these two passages nor the fact that there are two and not merely one seems to be recognized by Gaisford or by Bernhardy, the chief recent editors of Suidas. The text of the citations presents an interesting problem, for the discussion of which see Journal of Theol. Studies (I. c).

INTRODUCTION

lv

7. Add. i4,6n=Catal. 813. 16 (2). Saec. x. Contains an extract from book vi, beginning on fol. 1 r. (Montf. 428 B 7 sqq.)-
8. Add. 12,164. Saec. vi. On fol. 131 r. there is a quotation from the de sac. in a treatise by Philoxenos of Hierapolis (Montf. 394 B 4 sqq.). Also, on fol. 139 v. (from the same treatise) we have Montf. 376 A 9 sqq.
9. Add. 14,612. Contains the first citation under 8 (with one verbal difference).
All my knowledge of these Syriac MSS. is derived from information which Mr E. W. Brooks was kind enough to furnish. He writes to the effect that the Syriac is a very loose translation in these passages from the Greek, so that to make a complete collation would amount to copying out the whole. He has, however, provided me with the chief variations, especially in those passages where various readings are noted by the editors of Chrysostom. None of the readings suggested by the Syriac version seems to be of importance1.

{b) Latin. A large number of Latin translations of the de sac. has been published. But the only one which can throw light on the original Greek text is the vetus inter pretation, to which reference has been made in con
nexion with Bengel's edition of the treatise. This ancient version was known to Bengel in an edition published soon after the discovery of printing: neither the place nor date at which it appeared is mentioned

1 No Arabic or Armenian version is known to me. The Arabic versions would probably come from the Syriac or the Coptic, and thus be comparatively late. Ethiopic versions also (if any exist) would almost certainly be as late as the 15th or 16th century, as I learn from Dr A. Cowley of the Bodleian Library. For Coptic and Slavonic versions see Bardenhewer op. cit. p. 328 sqq.
2 Its author is generally alluded to as vetus interpres.

lvi

INTRODUCTION

on the title-page. It may be observed that Lomler speaks of three separate versions sine anni et loci notitia : and possibly Bengel's copy belonged to one of these editions. In 1504 the vetus interpretatio was published at Basle, but with various alterations. Another edition appeared in 1524 at Paris apud Petrum Gromorsum.
The value of this version by the vetus interpres is considerable. His identity has not yet been made out : many hold that he was Anianus the Deacon, of Celeda, who defended Pelagianism : see Jerome, Epp. 143 2.

§ 7. BIBLIOGRAPHY.
The following books may be found useful for reference. They are arranged according to the subjects of the various sections of the introduction.
1. On Chrysostom's life and works. Bardenhewer, Patrologie2, pp. 283--307. Batiffol, Anciennes literatures chretiennes : la literature grecque, 1897. Dictionary of Christian Biography, vol. i, art. on Chrysostom. Fabricius-Harles, Bibl. Gr., viii pp. 454--583Hauck-Herzog, Real-Encyklopadie, iv 101--ill, 1898, art. by E. Preuschen. Montfaucon, edition of Chrysostom, 1718-- 1738, Introductions, and Indices (in vol. xiii). Tillemont, Mimoires pour servir d IHistoire Eccldsiastique, vol. xi.
2. On Chrysostom's doctrine. Batiffol, Etudes dhistoire et de thiologie positive, 2me serie, Paris, 1905. Brighttnan, Eastern and Western Liturgies, vol. i, Oxford, 1896. Chase, Chrysostom: a study in the history of Biblical inter pretation. London, 1887.

INTRODUCTION

lvii

Forster, Chrysostomus in seinem Verhdltniss zur antiochenischen Schule. Gotha, 1869.
Hamack, History of Dogma, Eng. Tr., vol. iv, p. 297. London, etc., 1898.
Nagle, die Eucharistielehre des hi. Joh. Chrysostomus. Strassburg, 1900.
Neander, der hi. Joh. Chrysostomus3. Berlin, 1848, 1858.
Puech, St Jean Chrysostome et les mceurs de son temps. Paris, 1900. Especially valuable.
Puller, The Primitive Saints and the See of Rome*. London, 1900.
Schwane, Dogmengeschichte (Rom. Cath.) vol. ii pp. 783 sqq., 816, 826.

3. Pastoral Theology in the Fathers. The most important passages are collected in a book which bears the title The ancient Fathers on the office and work of the Priesthood in the Church of Christ*, London, 1891 (an Eng. Tr. of a portion of a work named ' du sacerdoce,' Paris, 1857). See also St Basil's Moralia, and the works of Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory the Great, etc.
4. On the style of Chrysostom's works, especially the de sacerdotio. Ackermann, die Beredsamkeit des hi. Joh. Chrysostomus. Wurzburg, 1889. Albert, StJean Chrysostome considM comme orateur populaire. Paris, 1858. Cognet, de Joannis Chrysostomi dialogo qui inscribitur arept Upaxrvvris. Paris, 1900. Croiset, Alfred et Maurice, Litte'rature grecque, vol. v pp. 951 sqq. Paris, 1899.
5. On the identity of Basil. Cognet, op. cit., pp. 16 sqq. Montfaucon, Monitum to the de sacerdotio in his edition of Chrysostom (vol. i, p. 440 of reprint). Tillemont, Mhnoires, vol. xi.

6. Text of Chrysostom.
Field, Introductions to his editions of the Homm. in Matthaeum (Cambridge, 1839), and the Homm. in Epistolas Paulinas (Oxford, 1849-- 1862).
For the text of the de sacerdotio see references given already in the text.

lviii

INTRODUCTION

7. English translations of the de sacerdotio. The following have published translations of the de sac.
into English:
H. Hollier, London, 1728: J. Bunce, London, 1759: T. Mason, Philadelphia, 1826: F. W. Hohler, London, 1837: E. G. Marsh, London, 1844: B. Harris Cowper, London, 1866: W. R. W. Stephens (the late Dean of Winchester) in Ph. Schaffs Select Library of Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, series i, vol. 9, 1892.
So far as I have tested these translations, the last named seems to be the best. The de sacerdotio has also been translated into French, German, Italian, Spanish, Danish and no doubt other European languages : for details see Lomler.

IIEPI IEPQSYNHS Aoros a'.

TaSe evecmv iv t&> a Koyw.

I. Bao-i'Xeios 6 Travras tovs tov Xpuo"ooTdp,ou ^iXovs wep/JaXXdp.tvos.
II. 'H 6/tdvoio Bao-iXtiou »cai Xpvo-00-rop.ou, kou cru^i^njtris 7rept TTOVTOl'.

III. "O £vyos av«ros «v tjj tov p.ovao~riKOv fliov p.era8t<i)fei.

IV.
V. VI. VII. VIII. IX.

"H 7Tp66vTlS TTtpl KOIVTJS OIK^CEOJS llf).<f>OTef)(i)V.
At tiJs /wprpos iiripSaL "H dirdrr] Xpuaoord/tov, jj ixprjo-aro iv ry )(tiporoviq.. BoCTiXttou Karrjyopia iiritacr)'; Kal dfafajs. Xpv<roordp.ou a7roXoyia dvTi\rj-irTiK-ij. Aira.Tr)S tvKaipov p.eyo KepSos. ©«tis «ai koivos toitos.

(/« Books i --3 Mi? division into chapters is that of Bengei and Seltmann. Montfaucon follows the Greek table of contents throughout^)

I. I. 'E/i.01 7J-0XX0! (iev iyevovro <j>L\oi yvijaioC re Kal

I tixoi in.iv xoXXoi fwxyz

I. Of the manyfriends of Chrysostom, by far the closest was Basil. The two were united by affinity of tastes and association in study, and were for a time inseparable companions : but eventually Basil adopted the monastic life, while Chrysostom was stillswayed by worldly ambitions,

Basil nevertheless continued to urge his friend to join him, and it seemed that his arguments were likely to prevail.
i. <t>l\oi] These included Euagrius, Theodorus (afterwards Bishop ofMopsuestia),andMaximus(Socrates H.E. vi 3).

N. C.

I
'

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I.I

aXrjOeis, /cat row ttJ? <£t\t'a? vofiow; /cat eifiore? ical <f>v\drTOvres dicpt,f3a><;' eh Si ti<; tovtcovI tcov vroXX&v, airavTas avTOVs vTrepf3aXX6/j,evo<; rfj irpb<; r)fj,d<; cpiXia, toctovtov ecpiXovetKijcrev dcpelvai kutottiv atrrou?, ocrov iiceivot, rovi 5 dTrX&i Trpo? r)fid<; Sia/cei/ievovs. 2. Ovto? tSiv tov airavTa fioi XpSvov TraprjKoXovdrjKormv r)v. ical yap iiadrjiidTwv r)\frd/jLeda t&v avTmv, /cat SiBacncdXoK e^prfcrdiieda tois avToh' ryv Be rj/xiv icai trpoOvfua /cat cnrovBr) irepl Toiif Xoyovs, ot)« itrovoviieda, fiia, etndvfiia re Xar\ /cat etc twv io avT&v Tt.KT0fj.ev7} TrpayfiaTcov. ov yap ore eh BiBaa-KaXovf fiovov e<j>oiTa>fJ.v, dXXa ical rjvuica iiceWev e^eX06vTa<; /3ovXevecrBat, ij(pr)v otroiav eXeadai tov fiiov fSeXriov r)fuv oBov, /cat evTavOa otioyvcoiiovovvTes ecpaivofieOa. 3. Kat erepa Be

1 kcu tovs] om kcu z II 8 kcu Trpodv/ua] om kcu fxyz || 9 eiroiov/ie6a codd omnes praeter cy' (ewovovfieSa) et h (eirau>ovue6a) || 10 owe yap ore f || diSacrKoKov ac oliv || u wouiv g

2. ets] i.e. Basil (Ba<r(Xeioj), not mentioned by name until c. 4. The identity of this Basil has not yet been definitely determined. It is, however, certain that he was not Basil the Great, of Caesarea in Cappadocia : see Introduction p. xxxiv.
3. Toaovrov ktX.] ' strove as hard to leave them behind] i.e. to outstrip them in the competition for Chrysostom's friendship. For atpdvai Karbtrai cp. vi 12 To\\<f Ttf plTpip Kcvrbiciv cupeivai.
5. c\t\ws ... SiaK.] 'who were neutrally disposed towards me ' : that is, had no special affection.
6. imdriiidTuv'] Chrys. intended to adopt trie career of an advocate : cp. tov biKaarrjpiu! Trpoo~e5peuoPTa below.
7. 5iSa<rKd\ois] Chrys. learnt rhetoric from Libanius, the famous sophist : and philosophy from Andragathius (of whom nothing else seems to be known) : see Socrates H. E. vi 3, and Sievers Leben des Libanius p. 150. His teachers in

Christian doctrine were Meletius (then Bishop of Antioch), Diodorus, and Carterius: Soz. viii 2.
9. 08s iironovueffd] For the use of the middle, iroveurdai, instead of the active, cp. ii 1 T<p wepl ravra irovovfie'vcp, and v 5 tov iroveiadat airfjKhaKTou (where it is used, as here, of rhetorical exercises) : also Homm. in 2 Cor. 503 B 6 yewpyis Sl 6\ov TroveiTcu tov I-tovs. The accus. with Tcoveicdai is more common in verse.
13. koX l-repa 64 ktX.] ' And other bonds besides these remained un broken and secure ' : i.e. besides having tastes in common, Chrysostom and Basil were well matched in respect of (a) fatherland, (b) wealth, and (c) position. 'E<pv\drrero, lit. 'were preserved,' indicates that all these bonds of union re mained unchanged as they grew up. The vulgate reading (see critical note) gives an easier construction : but it seems to be interpolated.

1. 1]

DE SACERDOTIO

7T/30? rovroa rifuv i<pvkaTTeTO dppayfj re ical ftefiaia. ovre yap iirl iraTpLBo? /MeyeOet eVe/ao? erepov naWov <f>povelv elyev ovre ifiol f&ev ttXovtos virepoyico<; rjv, eiceivos Be ecr^drrj crvve^r) irevict' dXkd ical to t?}? oicria<; fierpov to tt)? Trpoaipecrew; Icroardcriov ifUfielTO' ical yevof Be rj/uv 5 6/J,6rifiov f)v, ical travra Trj yvd>fir) crvveTpe\ep. 4. 'E7r«Srj Be eBei tov p-aicdpiov rbv t&v p,ovaf(u>v fieraBid)iceiv ftiov ical rrjv <pi\oao<f)iav rr/v aXrjdrj, oincen rifjiiv 6 £1/709 oi5to9 Zeros r\v, aXhC rj fiev iiceivov TrKdcrriy^ eicov(pi^ero fierempo<;' eym B' en ral<; rod icocr/iov ire7reBrjp,evo<; 10 eiriOvfiiavi icadeiXicov ttjv efiavrov, ical ef&iatpiirjv icarm fieveiv, vecoTepiicais avrrjv ein^pLOmv <pavracriai<;. 5- 'Ei/-

1 T"qv ofiovotav ravT7]v e<pv\aTTey appayrj (re) /cat (3ej3aicu> Chy' sin vulg || 3 eixo/iei> G [I 5 yevos ftxv Gp vulg || 8 owceri] km ovKeri c || 9 ij fiev irXaarryf ckcivov fwxyz || n t/Soccus oliv || rt\v e/iaurou] + ^nrxt" omnes praeter cxz

2. Tarpldos] Antioch, the capital of Syria. For a description of its splendour see Libanius I 275 sqq. (ed. Reiske) : and cp. A. Puech St Jean Chrysostome el les mceurs de son temps pp. 15 sqq.
3. otire ifiol pJv ktX.] otfre affects not merely the ju^c-clause, but the whole sentence: see Field on Homm. in Matt. 363 A, who quotes Dio Chrysostom p. 517 44. ( Reiske) : kqX fierb. ravTa ob% 0 [x£v dijfios, bfjieis, iiredv^a'aTe rCbv l-pyojv, twv 5e £v T^\ei ns AvTe1irev...6XKaf ir&vTes kt\. We may add Demo sthenes de Cdrona 1 79 o(ik etirov /xev ravTa, ovk typaipa d4, ' I was not content to speak without proposing.'
5 . to . . . laoaT. ] ' equality ' : from tffos, and lo-ravai ' to weigh.'
8. ttjv <pi\oaotplav r. d\.] The word <p(\otro(pia is commonly found after the time of Eusebius in the technical sense of the ascetic and monastic life : see Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. 18 (p. 76 ed. Srawley), Suicer Thesaurus, s.v. ; and, for the earlier history of the word, Lightfoot on

Col. ii 8. It is sometimes used, more widely, of the practice of the Christian religion (Mason Five Ora tions of Greg. Naz. p. 10) : but not apparently by Chrysostom : see Field's Index to Homm. in Matt, s.v. tpikoootpla..
9. 6 JV701] ' the beam ' of the balance : this word keeps up the metaphor of t6 IvoffT&aiov above. In the sense here required the masculine 6 £vy6s, instead of t6 tyybv, is used by Plato (Timaeus, 63 b).
tb. T\&(rTtyl;] 'fan' of a balance. There may be an allusion to the game of cottabos : the word ir\d<rTi7f is sometimes applied to the saucer or scale into which wine was thrown by the players (see L. and S. s.v. KbTTaftos).
11. rijv efiavrov] sc. Tr\d<TTiyya. The word ipvxh.v, which is added in some MSS, seems to be a marginal gloss.
12. vetirr. iirift. <p.] 'weighing it down with youthful vanities? For the transitive use of (TiPpWetv cp.

4

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. I

ravda Xoiirbv r) pev tpi\ia /8e/3fl«o? epevev rjplv, KaQdirep Kal irporepov r) Be crvvovaia BieKOTTTeTO. ov yap r/v row? prj irepl to, axna airovBd^ovTa<; Koivas iroieladai, t<W Bt,arpi^d<;. 6. 'fi? Be piKpbv Kal avrbs dveKvyfra tov 5 /3icotlkov kXvBwvos, Be^erai pev r/pd<; clpcpw Tea Xfye' TVV Be laoTr)Ta ovBe ovtuk; lo-^vo-apev cpvXd^ai ttjv irpoTepav. Kal yap Kal too j^povw <p6do~a<i r/pas, Kal iroXXr)v ttjv acpoBporrjTa eiriBei^dpevos, dvcoTepco irdXiv r)pS)v etpepero Kal eh wi^o? rjpero peya. f . TlXrjv dXX, ayados re wv, io Kal ttoXKov ttjv rjpeTepav Tipd>pevo<; tpiXtav, diravTcov eavrov diroa-Tijaav tu>v aXXwv, r)plv tov 'diravra %povov avvrjv eiriffvpwv pev tovtov Kal irporepov, oirep Be e<pVv> vtto rr)$ rjpeTepas KcoXvofievos pqOvpias. 8. Ov yap r)v tov BiKaoTTjpltp irpoo-eBpevovTa, ical irepl ras ev rfj aKt)vy 15 repTJrei<; eirTorjpevov, avyyivecrdai iroXXaKu; to) $i/S\ot$

I efievev ev ijfuv hikusxz efieivev ev rjfuv ftny || KaBaxep to wporepov y |f J tw x«pe] + 7rpor«yos xy' vulg i| 7 /cot yap tu XP°>"* cwxy franc || irpo<p$curas c franc || 9 irki/pi ayados re uv fy || 14 irapedpevovra Gbkstz henr

PplBriTai (passive) ii 7: for tpavraala = 'pomp,' 'vanity,' cp. adv. oppugn. vitae monast. II 67 a t})v /3iwruri)»' KaTairar/j&as tpavTaalav .
4. av^Kvxj/a /ctX.] ' rose from the sea of worldly cares? For avaictiirTeiv cp. ad Theodorum lapsum II 40 D avaKvfai t&v nvfidraiv, Plat. Phaedo 109 K (where it is used of fish).
5. /3iwTi(coG] ' worldly,'' from /31os, which is often used = vita saecularis : cp. |3i&>Ti/cds ippovHSas i 2, avSpwToi fJiwTLitoL iii 15. See also Lk. xxi 34, 1 Cor. vi 3.
ii. /cXiicWos] For the metaphor cp. i 2 tov xf'M'^i'o! exelvov koX tou KXuduvos, i 4 aypiuv nvp.aTuv : also in Hamlet : ' to take up arms against a sea of troubles.'
ii. ap.<pai rill xetPe3 ' with open arms.' The phrase is cast in a proverbial form, hence its elliptical character. It occurs again in Homm.

in 1 Thess. 458 F. Uporelvas, which is found in one or two inferior MSS, appears to be a gloss, inserted to fill up the ellipse : see, for a similar phenomenon in St Paul's Epistles, Lightfoot Notes on Epp. of St Paul p. 199.
9. irXV dXXd] used in late Greek instead of the simple tt\t\v or dXXd: Schmid Alticismus i 285.
14. TpoffeSpeiovTa]' attending constantly ' : cp. quod regularesfeminae viris etc. 260 A tcapQivov . . .r<p vv/itpltp trpoaebpeOovo-av. In the other two passages of the de sac. where it occurs the verb means ' to lie in wait for': ii 2 CTpaTbireSov tbfibv... ratfrj; irooaeSpevov tjj irotp.vn ; and iii 17 ^x0/°dJ---^cm?*e /col wpoaebpeliei.
ii. rj ffKr/vj] On the passion of the Antiochenes for the theatre see Puech pp. 268 sqq.

I.I]

DE SACERDOTIO

7rpocr7]\a>fiivq>, Kal furjSe els dr/opav ififiaXopri iroTe.

9. Aid tovto ovv fjv Bteipyofievos fjfiwv eireihr) Si irore iqp,as 'ekajBev els tt)v avTrjP tov filov naTaxTTaaw, ddpoas jjv irdXai, wSivev ivriOvfiiav airereice Tore1 teal ovSe to /3pa%vraTov ttjs r'/fiepas fiepos rjfids diroXifiiraveiv rjveixero> 5 SieTeXei re irapaKaXwv, iva rrjv oliciav eKacnos d<f>evTes ttjv eavTov Koivrjv a/xepa) ttjv oiKrjcriv e-^oifiev Kal eireiae <ye, Kal to irpdyfj.a r}v ev ^epaiv.
II. IO. 'AXXa fie al <Tvve%eis Trfs firjTpos eVmSat SieKwkvcrav ravTrjv iiceiv<p Sovvai Trjv ^apiv, fxdXXov Ze 10 ravTrjv Xafielv trap enelvov ttjv Swpedv. eTreiSt) yap jjcrdeTo ravra filovXevofievov, Xafiovcrd fie Trjs Sefjias, elo-rjyayev els tov diroTeTayfievov oIkov ai)Trf Kal KaOlaacra ifXriaLov eirl Trjs eivijs r)s r/fias wSive, iniyds Te r}(f>iei

2 dia tovto ovv Trporepov Sieip. rip.uv eireiSr) wore vulg || 7 ap.<porepot vu'g II exwMe" c VU^S II 8 xePM" ^wx II :3 out»;s x || 14 om cttl anon georg

I. eh iyopav tptfi.] In this phrase, which is classical (see L. and S. s.v. ipfJAWoi), f/t/SdWeic is in transitive: cp. i 4, iii 17.
3. dOpdois] 'suddenly? See other instances of this meaning of the word in Index III to this edition, and the corresponding Index to Mason's Five Orations of Greg. Naz.
4. rjv 7r. did. in. At. t.] lit. ' he then gave birth to the desire with which he had long been labouring': i.e. he expressed a wish which he had long been anxious to make known : cp. Homm. in Rom. 733 D Iva ttjv £tn8vp.la.v, rjv 7rd\at iSSivov,
TaVT7)V AtTOT^KU).
8. r)v iv xe/"r'''] ' was *" hand,' i.e. was being arranged.
II. But at this point Anthusa, the mother of Chrysostotn, interferes. She tearfully recalls to her son's memory the anxieties of her widow hood, and the sacrifices which she has made on his behalf. She begs him to stay with her until her death.

After that event, which cannot be long delayed, he will be free to do as he desires.
9. Trjs p.rp-p6s] Anthusa. Upon her had fallen the entire respon sibility of Chrysostom's education, her husband ( Secundus) having died when Chrys. was a mere infant : cp. t&s yap (bStvas tos iirl <rol dLade£dp.evo$ 6 BAvaTos ckc'ivov below.
ib. iiripb'al] The singular fwifSr] is a ' spell ' or ' enchantment. ' Hence the plural = ' entreaties ' which exer cise a spell or charm : cp. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. 11 60 A.
10. dteK&Kvo-av kt\.] At this period parents frequently tried to prevent their sons from embracing the monastic life : see Chrysostom's treatise adversus oppugnatores vitae monasticae; esp. II 59 D, where we have an appeal made by a father to his son much in the same vein as that of Anthusa. See also Puech pp. 251 sqq. _
14. £tt\ ttjs evvrjs 17s] i.e. irrl ttjs eivrjs i<f> ijs: cp. i 4 Atto ttjs rjp.4pas

6

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. n

BaKpvcov Kal t&v BaKpvcov i\eeivorepa irpoaeTiOr) to pijfiara, Toiavra irpos r)/xds diroBvpopAvr). II. 'Eyw, 4>r)cri, iraiBtov, ttj<; aperf}? tov Trarpo<; tov crov ovk d<pei07jv airoXavcrai eirl ttoXv, tw dew tovto Bokovv ra<; yap 5 ooBlvas ra<{ eirl crol BiaBetjdfievos 6 QdvaTos iicelvov, crol p.ev 6p<f>avt,av, ifiol Be yrjpelav eireaTTfaev dcopov, teal ra, rfj<; yypeias Beiva, a fiovai al tradovcrai BvvaivT av elBevai /caXftj?. 12. Aoyo? yap oiBel<i av efylicoiTo tov ^eifioovof eiceivov ical tov kXvBoovo<;, bv v<pio~TaTai tcopr), dpTi fiev t?)? 10 TraTpa>a<} oIkm? trpoeXOovaa, ical trpayfiaToov airetpo*; ovaa' ifjaL<pvr)<; Be irevQei Te da^eTM jSaXXopAvrj, ical dvayica^of&evij <ppovnBwv ical ttj<; rjXi,Kia<; ical tt)? cpvcreax; dvex,ecrdai fiei^ovcov. 13. Aet yap, olp,ai, paQvpLas Te oliceTwv fVtcrTpe<f>eiv Kal Kaicovpyia<i irapaTrjpeiv, avyyevwv diroKpove15 o~tfai eTri0ovXa<;, twv to, Br)p.6o~ia irpaTTOVTcov t<z? eVr/peta? Kal tt)v dirrjveiav iv rat? tcbi' elcrcpopdov KOTafioXaK <j>epeiv yewaiax;. 14. Et Se ical iraiBiov icaTaXnra>v 6 TeOvrj/cax; aireXdoi, QfjXv fiev bv, TroXXyv Kal ovToa irape^ei ttj firjTpl tt)v (ppovTiBa, ojaeo? Be Kal dvaXcopaToov Kal Beovs dirrjX20 Xay/ievrjv. 6 Be u/o? fivpltov avTrjv cpofSoiv Kaff eKacTTryv ep.Trip/KXr\cn Tr)v tffiepav, Kal irXeiovav fypovrlBoov t?jv

1 to. prj/iard] om ra cy anon sym || 8 itaXus] cra^ws anon sym |[ 12 ippovnSas--jiteifoi'as cm <ppovTi6ot juetfovos vulg |] 15 eunrparTOVTWv hm vulg || 170 Tcffceus tt.Tre\dt\ vulg

ixclvris ijt (i.e. &<p' i)s) rty <j>Mav t<rTep£a ttjv ai/iv.
3. toO irarpis tov ffou] Secundus (see above), who held the important position of magister militiae at Antioch.
ib. ovk &tptldr\v] 'I was not a/lowed' (from i(pttiiit).
6. to. Trjs XVP- SetvA] See on this subject Chrysostom's treatise ad viduam iuniorem, and in Annam I 707 c: Puech p. 134.
8. \bym yo.p oASeU kt\.] ' no words could adequately express ' : lit. ' could reach.'

12. ippovrLSuv ktX.] ' cares beyond her age and sex.' Anthusa was left a widow at about the age of 20 : cp. below on Sevre'pois 6(u\rj<rcu ydfiots, and on oi 5£ yeyypaicbTcs.
15. rwv to. By/i. ktX] ' the insuits of tax-gatherers.' drjii/xriov = ' a tax,' Lat. publicum, and Trpirreiv = ' to collect ' (cp. the v.l. elo-irpaTt6i>twv). At vi 4, however, Srifiioia wpdrrciv^'to be a public man, politician,' Lat. rem publicam agere.
16. t. t. el. fcara/3oX<xis] 'paymenl of taxes'

I. ii]

DE SACERDOTIO

7

yap toov xpTj/idratv eeS iairdirqv, ocrr)v inropAveiv dvayied%Tai, eXevdepiax; airov avadpetyai eiriOvfJiovo-a. 15. 'A\X' o/io)? ovBev fie tovtcov eireitre Bevrepois ofiiXrjcrai ydfwis, ovBe erepov eireio-ayayeiv vvp.<piov rrj rov irarpos olicLq rov aov' aX\' e/jievov ev rfj ^aXrj Kal rm Oopvftrp, Kal rrjv 5 criBr/pdv rrjs ^pet'a? ovk e<f>vyov Kapivov, rrpwrov fiev vrro rr)<; avadev ^oi)dovp,kvt) poirr)<;- 16. etpepe Be fioi rrapafivOiav ov \uicpdv rmv Beivwv ixelvmv, Kal to crvve^w<! rrjv gt)v oyfriv opav, Kal eiKova /not rov rereXevrrj kotos <pv\do~aeadai efJ,y]rv%ov irpos eicelvov dirr)KpiBa)p,evr)V KaXcSs. 10 Bid toi rovro Kal en vrjrrios top, Kal p,r]Be (fiOeyyeaOat, vco fiadatv, ore p.dXicrra reprrovcri tou? reKovras 01 7rat8e<?, iroXXrjv /not 7ra/36t%e? rrjv rrapaKXr/aiv. \J. Kal pvrjv ovBe eicelvo y av e^oi? alridcrao-ffai, on rrjv p,ev ·yypelav yevvalws rjveyicafiev, rrjv Be ova-Lav aoi rrjv rrarptpav 15 rjXarrdcrap.ev Bid rrjv rfj<; ^rjpeias dvdy/cr)v, oirep iroXXovs T(ii>v 6p<pavLav Bvo~TV)(r)o~dvT(ov oiBa rraOovras iycb. Kal yap Kal ravrrjv aKepaiov e<pvXal;a irdtrav Kal r&v otpei-

2 8fK\j/ai. m vulg || 8 tuv buvuv] + op*>s z || tjcaxwx om anon sym || ttjv <tt)v] ftSTTjv cnjv hmus || 9 eixoxa p.oi\ + \oyi$ect8ai z || 10 ep.^ivxov\-Y Kai y anon vulg || eKeivqii gy || 14 ex01*] + **x«i» kcu C vulg || 17 optpaviq. ixy' vulg

1. iui] ' I say nothing of: lit. ' omit.'
3. StvTt'pots 6/j.. 7.] See ad viduam iun. 2, where Chrysostom relates that one day his 'sophist' (i.e. probably, his teacher Libanius) questioned him about his mother Anthusa : us Si etirov on iT&v recroapdKovTa yeyovvla etKo<ni> (xei ^ol" wbv, ^{ ou t6v iraripa dTrtfJaXe rbv e/Ao»', 4%eTr\6.y7i, ical avefSdrjcre fdya, /coi irpos roi>s Tropoiras Id&v Bafiai, ttyl, otcu irapd Xpurnavots yvvaiKte elcnv. Chrys., like St Paul (1 Cor. vii4o),discouragedsecondmarriages, but did not absolutely forbid them : see his treatise de non iterando coniugio, and Puech p. no.

4. iireiaa-ya.yeiv'] Similarly we find the phrase ixrirpviav rraicrlv iveicrdyeiv of a widower marrying again : L. and S. s.v. tireicrdyw.
6. Kd/xwov] (a refining) *furnace': metaphorically applied to a state of trial, as in Deut. iv 20, Jer. xi 4 (with mSr/pa) ; Is. xlviii 10 (LXX) : CP- "'  J below.
17. 6p<pavlav 8v<r.] For the accusative with dvcrrvx^iv in postclassical Greek cp. Synesius Ep. cliv. 71;^ 8v<rTVxrf<raaa xvpeto." (quoted by Hoeschel).
18. tCiv 6<peik. <ct\.] ' T omitted nothing of the expenditure necessary for your credit (reputation). '

f

8

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. 11

\6vrm> et? rrjv ev8oKlp.r}cnv BaTravrjOrjvai rrjv <rr)v eveXnrov ov8ev, Ik t<£v efiavTr)<; Kal wv rfkOov oiKo&ev e^ovaa Bairavwa-a ^pr/fiaTCOV. 1 8. Kat fir) toi vofiuar)^ 6vei8[%ovo~dv fie ravra Xeyeiv vvv. aU' avri iravraiv ere tovtcov 5 fiLav alrm yapw, fxr) fie Sevrepa 'xqpeiq irepifSaXelv, fir)8e to KoifuqOev 17877 irevdos avdyfrat, iraXiv aXXa ireplp.eivov rrjv ifirjv reKevrt]v tcrto? fiera fUKpov aireXevaofiai j^povov. 19. Tov? fiev yap veov? eX-iris Kal et? yr)pa<; rj^ecv fiaicpov ol 8e yeyr)paKOTe<; rjfiels ovBev erepov fj tov BavaTOv dva10 fievofiev. 20. "Orav otrv fie Trj yfj ·7rapa8a><; Kal Tot?

6o-Toi9 tov 7raT/30? dvafiifjrjs tov aov, aTeXXov fiaKpds airo8r)fiia<s, kol 7r\ee OdXaTTav fjv av e6eXr)<;' tot 6 kwXvamv ov8ei<s' eco? 8 av ifnrveatfiev, dvda-^ov Tr)v fied' r/fi&v oiK7)crt,v. fir) 8r) TrpoaKpovarji; too dew fiaTrjv Kal eiKr), 15 toi? too~ovtoi<{ 17/ta? irept/3aXXa>v KaKoli rj8iKr)KOTa<! ovBev. 21. Et fiev yap e%ei? eyKaXelv, oti ere eh /3t&m/ea? irepieXKm <}>povTi8a<;, Kal t&v 7rpayfiaTit>v dvayKatpo irpoa-Trjvai t&v efi&v fir) tovs Tr)<; <f>vo-ea><; vo/iovs, fir) ttjv

I eXiTroc (fi'eXiTroi') eK tuv efxavrris ovSfv Kai wv fpwxy || 6 Koi/iur0ev henr || irepi/iepofiev anon || 14 /iti; Stj^ + ovv z || 17 trpo<srr]vaC\ (ppovrtfciv (ex<ppovri5as, ut videtur, ortum) omnes praeter C franc oliv: vet. int. praeesse ||
TOJV G03V Vulg

5. XW*'? xeM3.] Cp. irepifiiX\wv KaKoU below, y£hwTi TepifidWei i 5.
9. ol Si yeyqp.] Note the gender: a woman, when speaking of herself in the plural number, uses the masculine. The statement in the text, that Anthusa was so old as to be in daily expectation of death, is not to be taken literally. For if Chrysostom was born in 345, his mother, who was not more than 20 at the time of his birth (see on tieirripois o/uXijo-at. ydfiois above) was born not earlier than 325, and in that case, at the time of the events recorded in the present passage, which is probably about 373, she was not more than 48 years of age.

We must then suppose that her excitement leads her to exaggerate.
10. t. 6gt4(m.s t. trarpSs] Contrast the words of the dying Monnica to her sons: Augustine Con/, ix 27: ponite hoc corpus ubiainque: nihil vos eius cura conturbet etc.
12. 6 kwX. oiSeis] Cp. i 4 6 Se i£atpTi<r6/j.ei'6s <re-- ovk Iotu>. The present participle is also found in such clauses: o yap Ka.TapayK&fwi>... oitK tanv ii 3.
14. n&rqv Kal eUff\ The use of two almost synonymous words side by side is a feature of Chrysostom's style: cp. /iavBdvu Kal trvvlri/n ii 4, ipvOptdvas Kal 0oinx0e£s ii 6, dtSoiKe Kal rpi/aei iii 7, v 4.

I. n]

DE SACERDOTIO

9

avaTpo<pr)v, fir) Tr)v avvrjdeiav fir]Be aXXo firjBev alBeaOels, <o? eirifiovkovs <pevye teal 7ro\e/uov?. el Be airavra irparTOfiev Sare TroXXrjv cot irapaaKevdaai ayoXrjv els rrjv tov @lov tovtov tropeiav, el Kal /MrjBev erepov, ovtos yovv Kare^era) <re Trap' r)p,iv 6 Beafj,6<;. 22. K.av yap p.vpiov<; 5 eye Xeytji; <f>tXelv, ovBefc aoi trape^ei TocravTrjt; airoXavaai

eXevdepias' eireiBr) /j.j]Be earl tis, ot<d fieXei rf)<; a-rj<; evBoKifjLrj<re(i><; e£ ic-779 ifioi. 23. Tavra /j,ev Kal to, tovtwv irXeiova irpo<i efie p,ev r) firJTrjp, 70) Be Trpbs tov yevvalov eXeyov exeivov. 6 Be oil p.6vov oiiK eBvo-coirelro tois prjfiacri 10 tovtois, dXAa Kal irXeov evexeiro, raiiTa diraiTwv, atrep Kal irpoTepov.
III. 24. 'Ei/ Tovrtp Be rjfi&v ovtcov, Kal tov fiev frvve^uK iKerevovTOf, e/j,ov Be ovk eirivevovTos, a<pvco Tt? etnaTaaa <f>rjfir] Bierdpaljev ap.<$>OTepov<f r/ Be <f>rjfi7j r)v, 15 t? to Trjs leptoavvrji; rjfia<i d^la>p,a jieXXeiv TrpodyeaOac. 25. 'Eyw p,ev ovv, dfia to> tov Xoyov aKOvcrai tovtov, Beet re Kal diroplq awet.'xpfir^v Beei p,ev, firj iroTe Kal cikmv a\w"

I aideadrjs (us c aideo-dys aXX (as hkpst vulg || 3 ware] virep tov vulg j| 7 tis] + twi> aM wc || 16 «ri<r/foxijs vulg || irapayeaffai C

7. tireiS}) /aijo^] After iiret (iTeidfy and ire the use of p.i) for oi is very common in late Greek : cp. iii 14 i-jrel fiydt Trup...vwdKiTai, ii 1 Sti fiii&£ A.irA.TT]v 5ei...Kaktiv\ and see Clement of Alexandria Slromateis vii (ed. Hort-Mayor) pp. 289, 295.
10. owe t5v<r.'\ 'was not put out of countenance.'
III. Suddenly the rumour is spread that Basil and Chrysostom are to be made bishops. Chrysostom agrees to submit to consecration should this be forced upon his friend: but secretly resolves not to carry out his part of the agreement. Presently, when the critical moment arrives, Chrys, conceals himself; Basil is consecrated alone: and soon after comes in great despondency to Chrys., who is merely amused at his distress.
16. Uptaoivris] The vulgate read-

ing {wurKOTrjs, for which I cannot discover any MS. authority, no doubt gives the correct sense. From ii 2 brav be iKKk-qalas wpoffTTjvai 8£y kt\., iii 12 and following chapters, it is clear that what was proposed was to consecrate Basil and Chrys. as bishops, and not to ordain them presbyters or deacons. In iii 15 we have tok kiriaKoTcov mentioned specifically.
It has been objected that Chrys. at this time was not yet 30 years old, and hence was not eligible for consecration, according to the canons of the Council of Neo-Caesarea. See, however, Bingham Origines Ecclesiasticae Book II x 1 : Introduction p. xxiv. Athanasius was possibly under 30 when he was made bishop : but cp. Gwatkin Studies ofArianism p. 71 n.
18. &kwv dXw] For examples of

IO

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. in

airopla Be, £rjTwv 7roXXaKi<;, irodev etrrfkOe Tot? dvBpdaiv eKeivoK evdvp.r)6rjvai ti toiovto irepl fifiwv. et? yap

e/j-avrbv dfyopwv, oiBev evpto~Kov ej(pvTa TJ79 Tifirj<; d£iov Keivr)<i. 26. O Be yevvaio<; ovrocrl trpoaeXOwv fioi «ar 5 IBlav, Kal Kotvcocrdfi.evo<; irepl tovtwv a>? dvrjKow ye ovtv rr/<; <jy^fj,r)<;, iBeiTo, Kavravda Kal irpaiTovTas Kal j3ov\evofiivov<! 6<p0rjvai to avra, Kaddirep Kal irporepov eyfreaOai yap avrov eTolp.w<; rjfiiv, KaO' otroTepav av tfyoi)fie0a r&v 6Bwv, eire (pevyeiv eire eXeo~6ai Beoi. 10 27. Alo~66[ievo<; toivvv avrov T77? 7rpo0vfi!,a<; eyw, Kal tyrjfiuiv ^yrjaafj.evo<; oiaeiv iravrl TM koivw rfjs oc/cA/r/o-ta?, el veov ovTtos dyadov, Kai 777309 rrjv twv dvBpwirwv eiriaraalav eirtTijBeiov, cnroo~Tepoir)v tov Xpicrrov rrjv dyeXrjv Bid tt)V daOeveiav rrjv ifiavTOV, ovk dveKaXvyfra rrjv 15 yvwp/r\v, rjv efyov irepl tovtwv, eKfivw, KaiToi ye fir)BeiroTe irpoTepov dvaayop.evo<i Xadeiv ti twv ftovXevfidrwv avTov rcov efiwv dXX' eliriav Belv ttjv vnrep tovtwv ftovXr/v ets erepov dvaflaXeadai Kaipbv ipv yap vvv tovto Kareirelyeiv), eveiad re evdews fir/Bev virep tovtwv <f>povTi£eiv, Kal virep 20 i/iavTov irapeayov dappeiv, a>? ofioyvw/j.ovi]o~ovTO<;, ei iroTe ti toiovtov o-vfi0airj iraOelv. 28. Xpovov Be irapeXOovTos ov iroXXov, Kal tov fieXXovTOS 77/ia? xeipoTovqaeiv eXdov-

tos Kal KpvTTTOfievov /aov, firjBev tovtwv elBw<;, dyerai fiev &>5 e^>' erepa irpo<f>daei' BeyeTai Be tov £vybv, eXirl^wv,

9 <pvyew cyz vulg || 1 2 veov ayadov--eTriTrjSeiov vulg [| ttjv toiv iroWtav eirt. c vulg [| 17 virep'] vepi f || 18 ava(3a\\e<r0ai z vulg || 21 <rvp.fjaivri vulg II 23 /iovl + avros xy vulg

forced ordinations see Bingham Origg. Eccles. Book IV vii 1 --4 ; and compare the cases of St Ambrose, St Augustine, and St Martin of Tours.
6. xal irp. k. /3oiA. 6<t>6r)i>ai to avrd] ' to be seen to agree in both our actions and our plans'
11. ravrl T(j5 «oira] 'all the commonweal.'
12. viov 06. d7.] This and tt)v

&y{\r)i> are both dependent on airoOTepol-rpi.
22. x*lP0T0'rhauv\ 'to ordain.' The word was originally used of the election of the clergy, and was afterwards applied to their ordination : see Suicer Thesaurus, s.v., Mason Five Orations p. 16, Gore The Church and the Ministry* p. 275 n. On the form of ordination see DCA art. 'Bishop.'

I. in]

DE SACERDOTIO

11

e'£ wv vTrecrxT)fiivo<: j)p/i)v avTm, ical r)p,a<; 7rdvTa><i eyfrecrOai, fiaXXov Be vofii^cov rjfilv dicoXovQeiv. 29. K.al yap Tives Tu>v eicei irapovTcov, dir^oWowa 7T/30? tt)v crvXXrytyiv opwvTes, rjTrarrjcrav, fio&VTes to? aroirov eir/ tov fiev 6paervrepov elvat So/covvra irapa irdaiv (ip,e \iyovres) fiera 5 TroXXr)<; tt)? eVtet/ceta? elfjai tt} twv traTepoav icpLcrei, eicelvov Be tov ttoXv crvveTWTepov teal eirieiKecrTepov dpaavveaOai ical icevoBofjeiv, crictpTWVTa ical diroirriBdovTa ical dvTiXeyovTa. 30. TovTot? et£a? toj? ptfpMcriv, eTreiBr) rjKovtrev St1 Biecpvyov, elaeXOcev 7rpo? fie fieTa 7roXX^? tt}<; icaTr)- 10 (peias, KaOe^eTat irXriaiov, ical iftovXeTO fiev ti ical elirelv, virb Be tt)<; eirr/peias /care^o/ieix)?, teal Xoyto Trapacnfjaat, Tijv ftlav, rjv vTreueivep, ovie e-^cov, ap.a ra ^dvai itcooXveTo <f>8eytjacr0ai, tt}<; d6vpia<;, trplv r) tou? oBovTas {nrepfirjvai,

BiatcoTTTOvaris top Xoyov. $1. Opwv toivvv eyco trepi- 15 Baicpvv ovTa ical TroXXr}<; ireTr\r)p(op,evov tt}<! Tapa%r}<;, teal tt)v aWiav elBa><>, eyeXtov Te virb iroXXr}<; Tr;? r)Bovr)<;, teal Trjv Be^iav Karer^eav ef3ia%6p,7]v icaracpCXelv, ical tov Oebv iBo^a^ov, OTi px)i to Trj<i [/,r)%avr)S reXo<i elye tcaXov ical olov iji^ofirjv del. $2. '12? Be elBe irepi^aprj re ovTa ical 20 cpaiBpbv, ical irpoTepov r}iraTT)p,evo<; v<f>' r)p,wv rjcrdeTO, ical pdXXov eSdicveTO ical eBvcr^epaive.

1 vTroffxofievos fwxyz || 2 ri/uv] t/Sti z || 12 tijs aTopias y' vulg || 14 ipffcyyeadai vulg, et dehinc + vro kt vulg exaiX. vwo tijs a.6. (pdeyS-aaBcu, rr/s eirripeias Trpiv ij kt\. Gh || 18 (piXur cfx || 19 ra tt;s /ii)xal"/s vu'g II 2I K<" ^aXXop] om /cat cz

1. i% Cbv kt\.] i.e. en Toirwv a; 'from what I hadpromised?
3. a<rx&f^oi>Ta ir. t. cr.] ' chafing at his capture.'
8. ffKiprruvTa] ' being restive ' (like a young colt). Possibly dxovifi&vra continues the metaphor, in the sense of ' shying' : cp. i 4 diroirriSay.
10. irp6s lie] Apparently Chrys. had not returned, after the period of concealment, to his home, but was living by himself: cp. vi 7 oidt

irp&s air-fr (i.e. Anthusa) i<rrl fiol n koiv6v, vi 12 Sick Tavra rbv oIkIokop (' cell ') <j>vK6.ttw tovtov kt\.
12. iirqpeias]' indignation': cp. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. II 72 E iirrjpe&fccrSe (indigne fertis) ore oix apKovarjs ttjs rjXiKias irpbs rty &w6\av<riv. At i 4 the substantive bears its ordinary sense of ' insult,' 'abuse.'
19. ro t^s pjxop?s] = ^ /«ixlu''ii ' the stratagem.' t4\os...koK6v is the object of etxe.

12

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. iv

IV. Kai 7TOT6 fjuicpov air eiceivov K<nacrTa<; rov Oopv(3ov Tr)<; "*lrv%r)<;, 'AW el Kal to yfierepov, <fyr}(ri, BietrTvaa';, Kal Xoyov r^imv e^et<> ovBeva Xonrov (a>? eycoye ovk olSa avff1 otov)' tJ;? yovv viroXrityeax; eBet ere ^povricrai, Ttj<; 5 a-?;?, iw Be Ta travraiv rjvew^a<; o-TOfiara, Kal B6^tj<; <re epwvra Kevr)<; tijv Xeirovpyiav ravTqv TrapyrrjcrOai Xiyovcriv HiravTe<;' 6 Be i$;aipr)a6p.ev6's ere rr)<; Kar-qyopiaf Tainrj<; ovk ecrrtv. 33. 'Eyaot Be ovBe et? ayopav e/j./3aXelv aveictov Toaovroi 01 irpoaiovre<s rjfilv Kal Kad' eKaoT7)v iceyKaXovvTei Tqv rffiepav. fbWav yap tScocri irov <pavevra rr/? r)fiepa<! ytiepo? Tr)? 7ro\ectf?, Xa/3cWe? Kara fiova<i oaoi 7rpo? ij/ia? olicelws e^ovcrt, tc3 TrXelovl fie t?7? Karrjyopias vtroftaXXovo-i fiepei. elBora yap avrov rr)V yvcofirjv, <pa<rlv (ovBe yap av ti ere eXdvOave t&v T^eKeivov), ovk eBei atroKpv^raaOat, a\\' rjfuv avaKOivcoffaadai i^prjv Kal iravTWS ovk av rjiroprjo-afiev irpb<; rrjv aypav firj-^av^. 34- 'Ey<*> Be, on fiev ere ovk r/Bevv eK iroXXov ravra fiovXevofievov, alo-yyvofiai Kal ipvdpico 7TjOO? eieelvovs elirelv, firproTe Kal viroKpio-iv rrjv r/fierepav elvai

2 i/svxvs] + *·" 0 BairiXetos (et sic passim) f || 6 irapairriaaadai wyz || 7 Katcriyopias c || 1 1 pepet tt\% iroXews fp (pavevra 7rou tijs 7roXeus C vulg || 14 <re c\a6e ti vulg || 15 om eSei c

IV. Basil proceeds to describe the difficult position in which he has Seen placed by the action of Chrys. He is constantly blamed, he says, for not having known beforehand his friend's intention: while those who selected Chrys. for consecration are indignant at being openly flouted. Basil then reproaches his friend, more in sorrow than in anger, for the deception which he has practised.
1. SUvrvaai] 'you despised.' 4. {nroXijipem] ' reputation ' : cp. iv 7, 7 ; and Homm. in Matt. 523 B tQv iWuv ivTo\G>v wpesfiinepov jpi,
xai TrXeiova cfye t}]v iirb\i)\j/iv . 5. 8<5£t)S ktX.] ' all men say that it
was through love of empty fame that

you declined this ministry? For Xeirovpyta in the sense of ' sacerdotal ministration' see Lightfoot on Phil. ii 17.
8. «'s Ayopav t/n-f}.] Cp. i 1 els ayopav t^fiaXovTi (note).
10. Srav yap ISuxsi ktX.] The text seems to be corrupt. Possibly we should read r?s 'HfUpas, with itipos tt)s 7r6Xews as a gloss on 'Hyu^pas : but I cannot find any trace of this as the name of a suburb of Antioch.
n. Xapbvrts Kara /x6»as] 'taking me aside.' Kara fidvas (naTa/iavas)
occurs in Thuc. i 32 and elsewhere. 15. ii/itr] 'to us,' i.e. to the
friends of Basil.

I. iv]

BE SACERDOTIO

13

vopiawcri <f>iXlav. el yap Kal earcv, &airep ovv Kal eariv, Kal oiBe av avrbs dpvr)deirj<;, ef wv ell f)pa<; eTrpa^a? vvv, aXXa robs e%(0@ev Kal perpiav yovv trepl r/p&p e%ovTa<; B6%av KaXov ra r/pirepa icpvineiv Kaica. 35. EtVeti/ pev ovv Trpbs avTovs raXr)6e<i, ical &>? e%et ra icaff 97/xa?, okvoi1 5 dvayxd^opai Be Xonrbv triwirav, Kal Kvirreiv et? yrjv, Kal toi)? a-rravrS)VTa<; eKTpeireo-0ai, Kal airoTrrjSav. 36. Kav yap rfjv irporepav eK<f>vyeo Kardyvuxriv, yfrevBovs dvdyKt) pe KpiveaOai Xonrov. oiBe yap edeXrjaovo-i ·marrexxral Trore, on Kal BacriXetoi/ p,erd t&v dXXmv era^a<;, oh ov 10 6epi<i elBevai rd ad. 37. 'AWa tovtwv pev ov 7roXv<; pot, X070?, eireiSr) aol tovto yeyovev rjBv. r&v Be Xonrwv 7rei>? olo-opev T7)v auryyvTjv ; ol p,ev yap d-rrovoLas, ol Be <f>iXoBo%Ca<} ae ypd<f>ovrai' oaoi Be elalv d<f>eiBearepoi twv alricopevwv, ravff' rjp.lv eyKaXovaiv. d/j.<p6repa opov, Kal 15 trpoarideaai rr/v elf rovs TeTiprjKOTat vftpiv 38. Bwaia "treirovQevai Xeyovres ai/roiis, Kal el p.e'iX,ova tovtcov dripaaOevres erv^ov Trap rip.&v on Toaovrovt Kal tt/Xikovtov? «<£eVre? avBpas, peipaKia x0e<; xal irpdyqv en rah rod

2 ovS' av apvriBarp e| w avros ets rip.as kt\. fhpwxyz || 5 om wpos avrovs c || 9 e$e\Tj<Tovcn] + fwi fz vulg || 12 rqv Se Xmttjk x vulg || 13 rr/v ai<7xw")x] om Trpi vulg || 15 rauro re r)pj.v afup. cyn. o/iov vulg || 16 eis] irpos c

3. toM e'lwOex] ' the outside world.' Cp. Trapd twv e^uflex, irpbs rods tl~w8ev in this chapter, tt}s vapa. tux e?u0ex SifTjs i 5, oi t£uidev dutao-Tal ii 3, rue QuOev ap%bvT<av iii 1 5, oi tois l^iadei/ 8iKi£f«x Kaff^/ievoi iii 18. But at v 8 oi (£oiffei> means * pagans ' : ol toOtovs (roi)s \6yous) ao-KOvvres iv Ti/tj, 06 irapa tois H%w8ev jiovov, dWa Kal trapa tois t^s irlffTews oiiceiois. See also ii 4, where Chrys. quotes 1 Tim. iii 7 Set 5e airrbv Kal fiaprvpiav Ixeiv KaXty a-jro tux tfaBtv, and note ad loc. At ii 7 X67UX tux l^adev = ' secular learning.'
7. iKTpiweeBai] ' to avoid.1

id. dVomjoax] Cp. on i 3 (o-Kiptuxtci).
10. Bao-(Aeiox] Cp. on i 1 (els). 13. airovolas] 'arrogance,' the regular meaning of the word in Chrys. : cp. ii 4 eis ivirouw aipovrai iroXXoi, Homm. in Matt. 652 D it; dirovoias Tjnaprev 6 irpwros tivdpwiros, xpmrSoKijffas icodetav, Homm. in Rom. 661 D toioutoi oi iirl <ro<j>ia lUya. tppovovvrh eitri, koX eis awbvoiav iKirlirTOPTes tt)v ia-j(6.Ti\v. 14. ypatpovTai] 'indict': with genitive of the accusation (diroxoias). 16. tous Ten/t.] i.e. those who selected Chrys. and Basil as worthy of consecration.

14

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. iv

fiiov fiepifivaK eyicaXivBovfieva (iva %povov @paj(yv Ta? 6<f>pvs avvayayaxri, ical (paid TrepifSdXkwvTai, ical Karfjtpeiav viroKpivcovTai) ii;ai,<pvr)<; eh roa-avrrjv rjyayov Tifitjv, oar}v ovBe ovap Xrjyfrecrdai irpoaeBoicrjaav. ical oi fiev etc 7rpd)Tr)<; 5 vXnciai eh eayaTov yr)pa<i ttjv eavTwv eKTe'uvavTes aa/crjcnv iv rot? apyonevow elaiv dp^ovcri Be avrwv oi iralBes ai/T&v ical /irjBe tov<! vofiov<i aKijicooTe^, icaff o£><? Set ravrr/v avTOvs Bieireiv ttjv dp-^ryv. ravra ical TrXeuova tovtwv XeyovTe<; crui>e^c3<j t)/j,iv eirupvovTai. 39. 'E70) Be o ti fiev 10 aTTokoyrjo-oficu 717309 ravra, ovk e^to* Beofiai Be crow (ppdcrai fioi. ovBe yap cnrXdoi; ovBe elicr) ravryv ol/iai ere <f>vyeiv tt]v <pvyr}V, ical 777309 dvBpa<i ovtco /j,eydXov<s Toaavrrjv dvaBe^aadai, ttjv e^Opav, dXXd fierd tivo<> Xoyiafiov ical £T«ei|reci)<? eVi tovto eXdelv oOev ical Xoyov eroifiov etvai 15 erot 777309 airoXoyiav (TTO^a^o/iai. enre oJiv et Tiva 77730(f>aaiv Bucaiav 777309 roiis iyicaXovvTa<; Bvvrj<TOfi,e0a Xeyeiv. 40. Tlv yap avTos rjBiKTjfiai irapd aov, ovBeva diraiT<£ Xoyov, oi)% dov rjTrarrjaas, ov% dov irpovBa>ica<;, ov% dSv aTreXavaat Trap rjfiwv airavra rov ep,irpoadev ^povov. 2041. 'H/ieh ftev yap ical ttjv yJrv)(T]v ttjv r)/j,eTepav (<&9

7 om avrwv y || 8 om avrovs mux vulg || dieireu/~\ dioineiv cmnz vulg om tovtwv y \\ 10 om irpos ravra wy || 19 airi}\av<ras w vulg

1. fitpt/irais tyic.] ' engrossed in cares.''
. ib. Iva xpbvov /ct\.] ' if they contract their brows for a brief space'': note that iva here = ^dx: cp. Homm. in Matt. 501 D Kal 0 p£v Iva ti ef7rjj dffTefoK, iinrkyaBih airrjkBev, and for other instances see Field's note on Homm. in Matt. 404 E, and on Homm. in 1 Cor. 71 D. We may perhaps compare the use of ut in Latin (after ita) to denote limitation or restriction.
2. (pata 7rept/3.] ' robe themselves in black,' as a sign of grief and humility.
6. 0! iraijes cu5tu>'] i.e. those who

are young enough to be their sons. 9. tiri<p{>ovTai\ 'fasten upon, ' like
hounds upon a quarry : see Field's note on Homm. in Eph. 25 e: also Mason Five Orations p. 6.
11. airXus} 'thoughtlessly': in this sense it recurs in iii 10, 13, 18.
id. <pvyeiv ttjv <pvyl)v~\ For the cognate accusative cp. KepSavov/iev KipSot below, ftrXi/fey Tr\yp/ipi iii 14; and see Cognet de Johannis Chrysostomi dialogo qui inscribitur irep! lepoxrivris p. 73.
17. wv yap aiirbs] uv = to6tojv a, the genitive going with \Syov: 'satisfaction for the injuries which I have received.'

I. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

15

eltrelv) (pepovTes evedrficafiev o~ov rat? ^epal- av Be Toaainrj ·rrpbs r)fJM<; ej^pijcrco tj} iravovpyia, oarjirep av et, iroXep,iovi <roi Tivas <pvXd^acr0ai irpoviceiTO. 42. Katrot ye e^prjv, el p,ev &<f>eXip,ov Tavrrjv jjBeis ovaav ttjv yv&pvrjv, p,r)Be avTW to icepBos tpvyelv el Be eVt/SXa/S?;, ical rip.d<;, ovs 5 travToav del irpoTtp.av eXeyes, d-rraXXdfjai rfjs %r)p,la<}. 43. Su Be ical 07T&)? ep,ireo-ovp.e6a, airavTa etrpa^as' ical BoXov 001 ical vTTOKpiaews eBirjae irpos tov dB6Xu><; ical aTrX&s airavra ical Xiyeiv ical Trpdrreiv elwOoTa irpbs ere. 44. 'AX\' o/ao)?, oirep e<fw)v, ovSev tovtcov eyicaX& vvv, 10 ovBe oveiBi^co ttjv eprjpnav et? rjv KaTecrrrjcrai; ij/ia?, Tai avvoBovs BiaKo^ras eicelvas, e£ aw /rat f/Bovr)v ical uxpeXecav ov ttjv Tvyovcrav etcapTrtocrdfieda 7ro\\a/a<>. 45. 'AXXa irdvra ravra d<plr)p,i, ical (pepto crtyj) ical irpdcos' ovk eiretSr) irpdcos els r)[ia<; iTrXrjp./ieXrjcra';, aXX eireiBr) tovtov 15 edrjica e/xavTip tov vofiov, dirb t?}? rtfiepas eiceivT}<;, 77? ttjv <piXlav ecrrep^a tt)v o~r)v, virep t&v av rjfia? e6e\rjar/<; \v7re1v, fiTjSeiroTe ere et? diroXoylas dvdyicqv Kadicrrdv. 46. 'E7ret otc ye ovk els jxiicpa ttjv £t)puav tjjuv eirrf/ayes, oloOa ical avTOf e'iye p,ep,vqcrai t&v prfpuaTcov, ical t&v Trapd t&v 20 egcodev irepl rjpi&v, ical t&v vc\> rjfji&v, Xeyop,evcov del. TavTa Be r)v, oti ttoXv icepBos ijp.lv o/io-v/rir^oii? elval Te ical cppaTTeadai tt) irpot dXXrjXovs cpiXia. 47. Kat 01 fiev dXXoi iravTes eXeyov ical eTepots ttoXXois ov puicpdv axpe-

4 ^ir/5e avTTjs gktwrs vulg pt-r^be avros cy fiTjde aeavrov fp || 8 eSeijae] + ovdev vulg || 17 eBeX-qa-qs scripsi ?;0eXi)<ras codd. omnes 0e\i)s vulg || 19 «s luxpa] /xutpav cy' vulg 01/X' <r/UKpai> a «$ /mxpav mu |[ 12 o^o^vxois xy

1. (pipovres tvtO.~\ 'freely entrusted': tpipovres conveys the idea of promptitude : cp. ii 4 (ptpwv iuvrbv KaTeupJiixviat.
4. ttjv yvtbfnjv] ' the decision' i.e. to consecrate Basil and Chrysostom.
id. fiyjde airbv] sc. <ri. 13. ttjv Tvxpvaav] 'ordinary^' 1 common ' : this use of the word is

also found at ii 4, iii 10, iv 2: cp. (e.g.) Acts xix 11.
19. ovk els puKpd ktX.] Cp. ii 2 oi)k els xpiJ/taTa, dXXA els t^v eavrou V^xV* tt)v ^Tjp.lav btplffTarai^ iii 8 init. (v$a pev els xM^oto t) fq/ua ictX.
20. irapb. rwv tfaBev] See on rods e'fadev above.

16

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. iv

Xeiav tt)v rjfieTepav oicreiv ofiovoiav. iya> Be axfreXeiav fiev ovBetroTe evevorjcra, to ye eh efie t)kov, trape^eiv tlctlv eXeyov Be, oti tovto yovv air avTrjs KepBavodfiev KepBo<; ov fiiKpbv, to hvG'xe'ipwToi yeveaOai toZ? KUTaycovlcrao'dai, 5 fiovkofievois ijfia<;. 4&- Kal TavTa ere v7rofiifivr)crKcov ovk eTravcrdfirjv 7T0Te* ^aXe7ro? o tempos, oi eirifSovXevovTet; iroWoi' to T7J9 asyaTTTji; yvr)o~iov airoXoaXev, avreiar/KTai he 6 Tr)<s /3ao-Kavt,a<; oXeOpos' iv fiecrco iraylBcov Siaftaivo/xev, Kal eVl itrdX^emv iroXeeov -jrepnraTovfiev. oi fiev eToi/iot 10 Tot? r)/ieTepoi<; icfyrjcrdrjvat. KaKois, eXiroTe ti o-vfiftair), iroXXol Kal iroXXav)(p6ev iepecrTrjKacnv 6 Be crvvaXyrjo-cov oiiBels, rj Kal evapl6p,r)Toi Xiav. Spa p,r) BtacrTdvTe<; TroTe troXvv tov yeXcoTa 6<pXa>fiev, Kal tov yeXcoros fiec^ova tt)v tyi/iiav. 'ABeXcpbs vtto dBeXcpov f3oi)6ovfievos &><? 7roAi? 6j(vpa, Kal 15 o>9 /lefio^Xevfievri fiacriXeia. p,r) Br) BidXvcrys TavTtjv tt)v yvrjo-ioTrjTa, fir/Be BiaKoyjrr)<; tov p.o'tfXov. 49. Taura Kal to, TOVTcav -rrXeLova eXeyov o-vve%5><;' ovBev fiev Trore VTTOTTTevwv TOtovTov, aXXa Kal Trdvv o~e Ta irpos rffiai vyialveiv vofiVCpov, eK jrepiovcrLa'i Be Kal vyiaivovra Oepa20 ireveiv fiovXofievo*;' iXdvOavov Be, to? eoiKe, voaovvTi Ta (pdpfiaKa eiriTidels. Kal ovBe outoj? 6 BetXaio? mvrjo-a, ovBe yeyove p,ol ti irXeov eK Tavrr/al 777? dyav nrpofirjdeia';.

4 yeveaBat] eivai fhiyz || 9 TroXeais f || 10 ttoXXoi Se iroWax- vulg || 13 otpXijowpev x vulg |! 17 ra om fhwxyz || p-cvToi fx || 20 appuicTowri x

2. to ye els i/ie tJ/cop] ' so far as / am concerned ' : cp. iii 10 t<S ye els flfias tjkov, vi 2 offov els dvBpwtrelav
TjKe Siva/iiv. 8. iv p.iaif wayl$wv~\ Ecclus. ix
13, where the true reading is Siafialveis -- irepiTareis, changed by Chrys. to first person plural.
14. &Se\<j>6s kt\.] Prov. xviii 19, where the lxx text has adeX^ds vir. dd. fio-rjd. us tt6\cs 6x»pd Kal ir^ijX^, Iffx&ei 8e wffirep Tedep^Xtup^vov fiaalXeioc. Hence Leo would read in the present passage p.epoxXevp.iva /3<x<r£Xeia (neut. plur.). Chrys., however,

probably quoted from memory : cp. on ii 1 tIs &pa kt\., ii 2 oideis ydp ktK, iii 16 k\Ivov, etc., also Ap-
pendix p. 175. 19. ix irepiowlas] 'needlessly':
i.e. although it was not strictly necessary. The word ireptovala occurs again at iii 16 iv jroXXg wepiovaiq. ('wealth'), and vi n 6pq.s fie$' 6Vt?s 8elKvv<ri ttjs irepwv&ias (' fullness ') 6 Bebs.
22. obde yiyove KrX.] ' nor have / gained any advantage.' For the use of 7rX^0K cp. note on vi 12 (ttjs vXaicrjs).

I. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

17

50. HdvTa yap eiceiva pi-ty-as dOpoax; Kal ovBe ei? vovv j3aW,6/Avo<;, &atrep avepparurTov ttXoiov eh irikayos tfp,d<; direipov dcpf)Ka<;, ovBev t&v dypLwv i/ceivcov ivvorjaas icvfidTtov, direp ^/x.a? virop,eveiv avdr/Krj. $1. Et yap iroTe crvixfiabt) avKO<j>avTiav rj ^\eua<r lav r) ical aWrjv Tivd 5 vftpiv Kal iirijpeiav rjplv eireveyQr\val irodev (7ro\Aa/a? Be av/jb^aiveiv to, roiavra dvdyKr/)- Trpbs riva Kara(pev^ofie6a; tLvi KoivaiaofieOa ra<i tffieTepas dOv>J.ia<s ; ti? r)p2v dpJvvai, OeXijaei; Kal tov? p.ev Xwrovvras avaKoyfrei Kal iroirj&ei firjKeTi Xvirelv, r)fias Be irapap.vdijaeTai Kal irapaa Kevdcrei 10 Ta? erepcov tpepeiv diraiBevcria<; ; ovk eo-Tiv ovBels, aov TToppmdev eoTrjKOTO<> rov Beivov tovtov iroXep,ov, Kal p.T]Be Kpavy-qv aKovaai Bvvafievov ttotL $2. *Apa olBat ocrov e'lpyaarai aot, kokov ; dpa vvv yovv fiera to irXrj^ai einyt,vm<TKei<;, a>? Kaiplav r)p,lv eBa>Ka<; ttjv TrXrjyrjv ; S3- AXXa 15 ravra p.ev dcpeicrOco {ovBe yap eo~ri rd yevop.eva dvaXvcrat, Xoiirbv, ovBe tropov tois dir6poi<: evpelv)' tl irpof tow e^codev ipovfiev ; n irpb<s T05 alrlas dTroXoyr}o-6p,eda ra? eKeivwv ;
V. 54. ®dpcrei, <prjv eyd). ov yap virep tovtcdv eltu 20

1 km /xijSe eis ex vulg II i fia\ouevos vulg || 3 eira0i;icos c || 5 avfipcuri) vulg || 7 itoTa0eu{.]post hoc, verba aov Toppioffev tari\KOTo%--Tore (11 -- 13) collocat f || 13 om irore vulg || 18 om epov/iev w || 20 om eipu c

2. dairep avepp.. jtX. ] ' like a vessel without ballast,' The phrase is probably from Plato Theaetetus 144 A (pipovrai tZffirep tA dveppdrurTa irXoto. For the indebtedness of Chrys. to classical authors see Introd. p. xxxiii.
5. a\>Ko<pavT[a.v\ 'calumny': i(\e\iaaiav ' mockery ' : t^pir ' wanton insolence' : twfipeiav 'abuse.'
9. dva/t<5^«] ' beat back,' ' check.' 15. Kaiplav] ' deadly.' 16. rd yevbueva d».] 'to undo the past.' 17. oiSi irbpov ktX.] Cp. i 5

r^tyr/v iKavyv ttoXXous irdpovs (v tois diripoij eipeiv.
id. irpbs rois t£u$ev] See above on tovs Qoidev.
V. Chrysostom begins his reply. He admits the deception, but claims that it was justifiable, being intended for Basil's benefit. He gives instances where deceit is by common consent allowed to be practised : thus (a) in war (b) in the art of medicine. The examples of Michal, Jonathan, and St Paul are also cited by him in support of this contention.

N. C.

2

18

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. V

fiovov erot/409 evOvvas vire^eiv' aXXa ical wv dvev6vvov<s f^ids dcpfjicas, ical tovtcov ireipdaofial, aoi Sovval Xoyov, a>9 av 0Z09 Te &. ical ei fiovXei ye, air avT&v irpwTov tt)<; a-nokoyias rS>v Xoycav Troitfcrofiat, ttjv dpyfiv. 55- Kai S yap av eirjv aroiro'; ical Xiav dyvcbfioov, el ttj<; irapd t5)V e^codev 8ofr/9 <j>povTt,^tov, ical OTra><; iravcraivro rjplv eyicaXovvre<i iravra ttoi&v, tov airdvTwv fioi tfttkraTov, ical roa-avrt) irpb<; r/fias alSol Ke'^p'qp.evov &>9 /J,r)8e virep tov r/Siicrjcrdat (prjaiv eytcaXecrai ffeXrjcrat, aXXa cppovSa ra

10 avrov depevov en twv f)p.eTepwv (ppovri^eiv,--fir) hvvalp,r)v, a>9 ovic atitKO), ireiaai, dXXa fiel^ovi irepl avTov <f>aivoi/j,i)v icej(pr]fievo<; padvfila, ??? avTO<; trepl r)ixd<; eirehei^aro crrrov§779. $6. Tt 7tot ovv ere tf8iici]crap,ev ; eTretBrj ical evrevOev eyvcbicafiev els to TJ79 aTroXoyia<; dcpelvai ireXayos- apa ore
15 (re ·jrapeKpovcrd/ieOa, ical ttjv rjfieTepav itepvyfrapev yvd>p.rjv ;

a\\' eirl icepSei ical tov diraT7]6evTO<; crov, ical ol<; d-iraTrjaavTe<i ere trpovZwKap-ev. 57- Et p.ev yap Bi oXov to TJ79 ic\oirfi<; icaicbv, ical ovic eaTiv eU heov avrm xprjeracrdai TroTe, Bovvav 6Toiuoi Biktjv f)f&ei<;, fjv av avTO<; e0e\ri<f p,dXXov 8e 20 crii p,ev ovSeiroTe Trap* rjp.a>v dve^rj Slicrjv Xaftelv, ^/otet? 8e eavTtov icaTayva>cr6fj,e&a TavTa, a t&v dSiKovvTcov 01 Scxd-

I avV$vvovs ijfi. a<prjK.] av ijfias evdvvas anaiTUfft (airaTwat) wy* ||

4 om Ttav \oyo>v c || 6 Trauffoivrai vulg [| 01 eyKa\ovvres vulg || 9 tppovdtjv

agikrtwx trap' ouSck c vulg || 11 aWa] + Kai c || 13 TjSiKTiKa/iev vulg ||

18 a7roT7)s c || aim; c

4. Kal yap in ktX.] ' For I should be peculiar, indeed most perverse, if while anxious for the good opinion of the laity, and eager to prevent them from accusing us, I should fail to convince of my innocence my greatest friend : who has, moreover, shewn such tenderness for me that he will not accuse me even for my alleged ill-treatment of him, but sets aside his own interests, and can still think of mine.'
In this sentence el goes with pii Svvalii-qv, and Sirwt iraiaaivTo depends on iravra irotwv. «j (after

nexpt^"0'') is = ware, and goes with the infinitive $e\9jaai.
12. tJs--o-irovdrjs] i.e. <tttovStjs t\v. 1 4. iyvibicap.ev kt\.] ' we have determined to set sail on the sea of apology ' : dipetvai is here used for ifKoiov aipeivai (solvere navem) : cp. i 4 uxrirtp ir\oiov . . .ijp.as dtpi'iKas. 15. irapeicpovo-.] 'misled,' 'deceived.' 16. koI ofs dirar.] i.e. Kal tuelvuw ofs <ctX. 17. tA rrjs k\ott)s] Cp. rb T77S urixavijs i 3 sub fin.

I-V]

DE SACERDOTIO

19

foin-e?, orav avrovs eXcocriv 01 /carijyopot,. 58. Et Be ov/c del to TTpayfia eVt/SXaySe?, aWa irapd ttjv t&v yjpa>p,eva>v trpoal- >. peciv yiperai <j>av\ov r\ kcCKov, a<£ets eyieaXeiv to rjirarrjaOai Bei^ov eirl icaicm tovto Teyyr)o-apAvov<;' a>? eta? av tovto dirfj, fj,rj on p,efiyfrei<; ical alrias eirdyeiv, dWd zeal aTroBi- 5 Xeadai rbv dirarrnvTa Blicaiov av elrj tow ye evyvcopovms BiaKelaOai f3ovkop.evov<i. 59- ToaovTOV yap ej^ei icepBo<s evKatpos dirdrq koX fieTa t?7? opOrjt yivofievr) Biavoia<s, oj? TroXkovs, OTi p.r) irape/cpovaavTo, ical 8iicr)v Bovvai TroWd/cis. 60. Kat el fiovket, ye t&v aTparqy&v tov<; e'£ alcbvos 10 evBoKifir)<ravTa<; igeTacrai, to, irKeiova avT&v Tpoiraua Tr)<; a7raT7/5 ebprjo-ei<; SvTa xaTopdcopMTa, teal p,a\\.ov tovtovs eiratvovjievovt, rj tov<; iic tov cpavepov KpaTovvras. 6 1. Ot fiev yap p,eTa TrXeiovos Tr}<; 8airdvr)<;, tcai tt)<; tojv ^·qfidTtov koX Trj<; t&v croffMaTcov, icaTopdovari tov? Tro\i[iov<;' to? 15

1 c\cyx<>xrtv kmnstuxz || 4 Tex"o.<rap.a>ovi yz vulg II 9 wapKpowr.~\ XPVaaivro y

1. el Si obk del ktX.] A certain kind of deception, or 'pious fraud,' which Chrys. here defends, is styled by him oiKonofila ('good manage ment'): see later on in this chapter fjLaWov Si ouSi avdTTjv to toiovtov Sel KaXeiir, dXX' oUovopdav Tiva. His attitude towards falsehoods which have an honourable object is the same as that of Plato : in Rep. 389 B (cp. 382 D) it is laid down that the rulers of the city may deceive tj xoKepliav r) ttoKitwv tutna iT ilxpcXiia rijs iriXews. Cp. also Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii 9 (p. 279 ed. Hort-Mayor) quoted on ray larpuv below. In other passages, however, Chrys. denounces dissimu lation and extols veracity. Cp. Homm. in Joann. 164 B obSiv ri)s a\-i)6cias (payepdrepov ktX., and other passages referred to in Montfaucon's Index Rerum s.v. 'Veritas,' and in Cognet p. 27.
For other early Christian views

on the subject see Augustine de mendacio and Enchir. 18: Acta S. Iuliani Anazarb. (Analecta Boll. vol. xv).
2. Tapk tt)v too. kt\.] ' is made bad or good by the intentionvf those who employ it.' Hap& = ' because of: this use, with accus., is found in classical authors {v. L. and S. s.v.): cp. also, for exx. in Chrys., Field on Homm. in Matt. 512 c, who quotes e.g. the phrase oiSiv irapA. tovto, nihil hinc (eveniet).
4. Seil-ov ktX.] sc. i]fia.s'. ' prove that I contrived this with intent to
hurt:
5. nil oti\ ' to say nothing of,' ' so far from ' ( bringing) .
id. diroSixfSai] The subject of this verb is robs ^ou\o/i^ous ; and its object is tov &ira.TwvTa.
II. TTJS &T&TTIS. ..KO.T0p6.~\ ' SUC-
cesses won by deception ' : cp. Karopffovjt toi>s iroXe/iovs below.

"

_J

20

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. v

/jLTjSev avTois TrXeov airo t?j? vuer}? yiyveardai, dWd trap ovSev to t&v rjTTcofieixov tov<; KparovvTa<; hvaTv^etv, Kal t&v arpaTevfiaTtov dvrfKwixivwv, Kal t&v Tapueimv tce/cepmfievwv. 7T/30? Be tovtoii ovBe rfj<: eVt Trj vik-q 86fjr)<! avTovt 5 d<j)ir}cnv diroXavaai ird<rr)<;. [lipos yap avri)<i ov fitKpov crv/j.{3aivei Kal roiis ireTTTwicoTas /capirovcrdai, Sid to Tat? i/ri/^ai? viK&vTas rot? a&fiacriv rjTTacrOai p-ovoii · a>?, el ye ivfjv ftaWofievovs fir) irlirTeiv, p/qBe 6 ddvaTOs iire~x9<ov avTovi erravcrev, ovk dv earrjcrav Trjf irpoOvfiias ttotL 10 62. 'O he d-TraTrj KpaTrjaai Bvvr}6el<; ov crvfi<j)opa fiovov dXKa kcu yeXwTi irepifidWei toiis ·jro\efiiov<;. ov ydp, wairep eicel tov<; iiraivov; efj tar)? drrocpepovTai dfifyoTepov Toil? eVt Trj piofirj, ovtco ical ivTavOa tou? iirl Trj cppovrjcrei, dW' SikoV T&V VlK(OVTQ)V 6CTTI TO ftpaftelOV ICal, TO TOVTCDV 15 ovk ekaTTOv, tt)v d-trb tjj? viKTfi r)Bovr)v dicepaiov Trj iroXet. <f>v\aTTOVO~iv. ov ydp iaTiv, wcrirep o t&v ^prjfiaTCOV irkovTOS /cat to T&v aaipbaToav Trkrjdos, r) t?j? "tyv)(fi<i (fipovqai<:' d\X' eicelva fiev, oTav Tt? outoi? iv toi? 7roXe/iois XprJTai crvvex&s, Sairavdcrdat, avfifiaivei, ical diroXeiireiv 20 Toils e^ovTa^' avTTj Be, oaqnrep dv tis avTrjv dvaicivrj, TocrovTtp fiaWov av^ecrOai -irefyvicev. 63. Ovk iv tois Tro\e[wi<; Be fiovov, a\\a Kal iv elprjvg iroWrjv ical dvayKalav evpot, Tt? dv Trj<; diraTris ti)v %pelav Kal ov irpos to

1 rjfmjfievuv--Kparrftravras mnu 7rap' ovdev rp-rov Ttav irrTTjfi. rovs Kparrj(ravras vulg (rjrrov y') || 3 Taneiuv vulg || 5 a<pia<nv mn vulg || 7 7irri)gl;rm vulg || 10 hovti fwxyz || 12 tpepovrat c

1. irap' oiSiv ktX.] 'the victors suffer almost as much loss as the vanquished.' Ilap' oiSiv = ' with no difference,' i.e. propemodum,' kal-
most': irapi has here the same force as in Trap' ciXfyoc, 7rapA to(toOtov.
The word rjrrov, which rests on little or no authority, is no doubt a gloss, due to a misconception of 7rap' oiSiv, which was thought to be = 0686'. See Field's discussion of

this passage, note on Homm. in Matt. 641 A.
5. i<plrjaiv] sc. rb Ik toO (pavepov Kparelv.
7. et ye ivr\v kt\.] ' if they could have prevented themselves from falling beneath theshower ofmissiles' I cannot find any MS authority for the reading /SouXo/t^ouj found in some early editions.
14. fipafielov] 'prize': cp. ftrad\ov ii 1.

I. v]

DE SACERDOTIO

21

TJ79 7ro\ews irpdyfiara fiovov, aXXd teal iv ol/cla 77730?

yvvaiKa dvBpl, Kai 7rpo? dvBpa yvvaiKi, Kai irarpl 7rpo<s

vlov, Kai 7rpo<{ fylXov (plXa, fjBr) Be Kai irpbs trarepa iraial.

64. K.al yap twv tov lLaovX ^eip&v r) tov £aot)A. Ovyarijp

ovk 'iayyaev av eTepa><; i^eXecrdai tov dvBpa tov avTrjs, 5

oU t) /xeTa tov TrapaXoyio-aadai tov TraTepa. 6 TavTrjf

&e dBeX<j>6<;, tov vir e'/cetvi;? 8iao~m0evTa awaai /3ovX6fievo<;

KivBvvevovTa, iraXiv tois auTOi? onXoif i-^prjO'aTO olcnrep

Kai 7] yvvrj. 65. Kai 0 BaeriXeto?, AXX ovBev tovtcov irpof

ifj., <prjo-iv. ovBe yap i%8pd<; iyco Kai TroXejuos, ovts tcov 10

dhiKelv iTrt,%eipovvT(DV, dXXa irdv rovvavTiov. ttj yap cry

yvcofir) to ifiavrov iravTa eirnpe^a^ aet,, TavTy elirofiTjv,

ffirep etfeXeucra?. 1X2. 66. AW w &av/j,ao~ie Kai dya-

6(i)TaTe, Bid tovto yap Kai avT0<; <f>6daa<; elirov, oti ovk iv

TToXeficp fiovov, ovB' eVt tov<; ij(6poii<;, aXXd Kai iv elptfvr/ 15

Kai eVt toi)? <f>i\TaTOV<; TavTr/ ^prjo-aadai KaXov. 6j. "Oti,

yap ov Tot? diraTwai fiovov dXXa koL T019 diraTOofievoi^ tovto xprjo-ifiov, TTpoo-eXOwv Tivi twv laTpwv ipmTTjaov,

7r<B9 diraXXaTTovo-i tj)? voaov tovs Kap,vovTa<; ; Kai axovo-r)

irap' avTwv, oti ovk dpKOvvTai ttj Teyvy fiovr), dXX' eanv 20

ottov Kai ttjv diraTr]v irapaXaftovTes Kai tt)v irap' avTrjs

fiorj0eiav KaTa/ii^avTe^, ovtw} eVl ttjv vyleiav tov daOe-

vovvTa iiravrfjayov. 68. ' OTav yap to 8vo~dpeo~TOv twv dppao-TovvTcov Kai tt)? voaov Be auVrJs to Bvo-TpdireXov fir)

5 om av cfhxy || 6 Kai 0 r. y || 8 c/cexpijro c || 11 aXX' curai> vulg | 16 XPV^^111 vu'g II 22 T0V* aaOcvovvras aby henr vulg

4. i) toC 2. 0.] Michal: see 1 Sam. xix 11 -- 18.
6. 6 r. S. d5eX06s] Jonathan : I Sam. xx. 5 sqq.
13. ayadibrare] For this form of the superlative of aya06s, instead e.g. of /Watkttc, cp. iv 1 (5 7rdvTwv dya.6tIiTa.Tc ai : and see Lobeck Phrynichus p. 93, Blass Gr. N. T. II (4). P- 34E.Tr.
14. <p6aaas etrov] ' / said before': cp. iv tois cpdaxravLv, ' in the preceding part,' Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. 35

(p. 133 Srawley). In the sense 'I said before ' we also find t<(i9i\v eliriiv : adv. oppugn, vit. monast. I 55 A.
18. tov larpdv'] Cp. Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii 9 larpbs Trpbs vo<rouvTot tirl ffurtjpta tGjv Kativbvrtav ipetiffeTat, and see on el Si oin iel above.
23. rd Svffdp. t. 6.p"p.] Cp. iii 16 Svaipearov yip tus ol voaovvres (note).
24. rrjs vhaov. ..t6 Svarp.] ' the intractable (obstinate) nature of the disease itself does not admit of the

22

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[I. v

Trpoairircu rd<; twv larpSiv <rvfJ,/3ov\.a<i, tots to ttj<; aTrdrrj^ VTroBvvai Trpoawirelov dvdyKT)' iv, wenrep eirl aicr)vf)<;, rrjv t&v yt,vop,kvu>v dXr/Oeiav icpvtyai 8vvr)6<£<TiP. 69. Et Se fiovXei, Kal iyd> aot, Sir/yr/o-o/Aai SoXov eva i/c ttoXXwv, duv 5 r\Kovo~a KaracKevd^etv larpcov TralSas. eireireae irore Tivo 7TU/36TO? dOpow; fierd ttoXXtj? t??? cr(f>oSp6rrjTo<;, Kal f] (pXol; -ppeTO' Kal to. p.kv 8vvdp,eva <r/3eaai to irvp dtre-

arpicpero 6 vocrwv, iireOvp,ei Se, Kal 71-0X1)9 evmeiTO, toi)? elenovrai; 7T/30? avTov atravTas trapaKaXwv, aKparov ope^at lo ttoXvv, Kal irapacr^eiv ifKpoprjOrjvai ttj<; 6Xe6piov TavTTjs iiriQvfiias. ov yap top Trvperov eKKavcreiv p.6vov efieXXep, d\Xd Kal irapairXri^ia Trapa8(oo~eiv top SeiXaiop, el ti<; avrw 717309 rai)Ti]v el^e rrjv ydpiv. JO. 'Evravda t??9 TexvV* dTropovfJievrj'i, Kal oiSe/uap e%ovo-r)<; p,T)%aprjp, dXXa 15 iraPTeXS)<; eK/3e/3X'r)p,evr)<;, elo~e\0ovcra TOo-avT7]v eVeSeifaTO tt)v av-rrj% hvpap,iv r) dirdrr], ocrrjv avriKa Trap' r)p,Sv aKovo-rj. 71. 'O yap tarpon aprv 7779 Kaplvov irpoeXdov 07709 oarpaKOV Xa/3a>v, Kal pdifTa? o'ivto ttoXXS, eira dvaairdaa<i K6vov, Kal TrXrjaas vBaro<;, KeXevet, to hwpjdriov, evOa Kare-

2 errt] + ttjs vulg || 3 yevo/icrwv vulg || 5 cxcire abhwz || 17 apri\ + euro vulg

plans of the physicians' : i.e. does not allow them to be carried into effect. For wpoalifrai cp. Plat. Phaedo 97 B tovtov (t6v rpbnrov) ovdap.rj irpoaic^ai, * I cannot accept.'
1. rb ttjs dir&TTis ktX.] ' to put on the mask ofdeception.' Trpoo-anreiov is also used by Plutarch and Lucian, instead of the more classical vpbawrov.
2. iirl aKTiVT)i] Chrysostom's early passion for the stage (cp. i 1 irepl ras iv rrj (TKrivy rip\j/eis iirrorjftivov) suggests similes drawn from that source.
5. iarpdv iraiSas] Cp. larpuv rauriv vi 4. It is a periphrasis for tarpons: cp. vtes 'A^aiCc (Homer), vaiSes '\vSSv (Herodotus) : also frequent in lxx.
7. T] 0X6f] ' the fever-heat.' 8. iroXut iviiceiTo] ' was impor-

tunate' 'insisted.' The phrase is cited from Hdt. vii 158-
10. ifupopyB. . . .iiri6vp.tas] Cp. ad Theodorum lapsum I 30 A ip.<j>opridrjvai ttjs t-jriQvillas.
II. oi yap] The yap explains the epithet dXedpiov.
14. airopoviUrqi] Probably middie; aTopovfuu=airopu is also found in Hdt. and Xenophon. It might, however, be passive : for Chrys. uses airoptiv raia = ' to place someone in a difficulty ' : cp. Homm. in Matt, 579 A.
15. iKficfSkrmlvip] ' having been rejected,' i.e. as valueless.
17. &pn...Tpoe\66v'] The taste of the newly-baked clay would help to deceive the patient, and to persuade him that the water was really wine. XlpoeKBiiv (masc.) of several editions seems to be merely a misprint.

I. v]

DE SACERDOTIO

23

kito o voatov, o~vo~Kiao~ai 7rapaireTao-fj,ao-i 7roXXot?, iva f&r) to (j>w<{ eXeyijr] tov BoKov, koi BIScoo-iv eiarielv to? aicparov TreirXrfpcofievov. "]2. 'O Be trplv et? ra? %eipa<; Xafteiv, vrro rf)<i oo-fj.fj<> irpoaTreaovar)^ evdeco? diraTT)6el<;, ovBe troXvirpayixovelv r)veo")(eTO to BoOev dXXd Tavrrj ireiffo- 5 fievos, icaX tg3 aKOTei KXawret?, viro ts Tr)<; eiridvp,La<; eTreiyofievos, eo~irao~e tov Bo0evTo<; fieTa 7ro\\fj<; ttj? irpodv/iias' Kal ifupoprjdels direnvd^WTO to 7rvlyo$ evdews, Kal tov etriKeifievov ilje<pvye kivBvvov. 73- E'Se? rfj<; dnraTrfi to KepSo<i ; Kal el iravTas /3ov\oito ti<; twv iaTpaiv KaraXeyetv 10 toi)? 80X011?, e« aireipov iicTrecrelTai firjKos 6 Xo*yo?. 74. Ov fiovov he toi)? rd crd)/iaTa depairevovra^, aWd Kal tov? tcov yfrv^iKwv voaiffiaTtov 7rifie\o/ievov<; evpoi Tt? iiv o-we^ai? tovtw Ke%pr)fievov$ toS <fiapfiaK(p. ovtco t«? 7roXXa? /ivpidBas eKeivas twv lovBalmv 0 fiaKaptof irpoctf- 15 ydyeTO TlavXos. fieTa t<xvtt/? Tr)s irpoaipeo-eats irepieTefieY tov Ti/iodeov, 6 TaXaTais e-TrtaTeWeov, otl Xpt,o-To<; ovBev ax^eXryo-et toi)? irepiTe/Avofievovs. Bid tovto vtto vo/iov eylveTO, 6 tyfiiav r)yovfievo<; fieTa tt)v et? X/hcttw irLoTiv Trjv dirb tov vbfiov SiKaioo'vvrjv. 75- IIoXXj/ ydp 97 t?/? 20 dTraTT}*} wrj(vs, fiovov fir) fieTa BoXepas TrpoarayeaQw tj)? irpoaipeo-eco<i · fidXXov Be ovBe diraTyv to toiovtov Bel Ka-

Xelv, dXX' olKOvofiiav rivd, Kal o~o<f>iav, Kal Teyyifv tKavrjv ~?

6 iTKOTif cfhwxz II 7 eair. to SoSev mnx vulg || evirovSaffc tov SoBcvtos

Hera w. t. TrpoB. \af}eiv c o-irouScurcu tov doBevros p.. ir. t. irp. \a(3eui girw ||

8 tov eirtKifSvpov efe0. 6a.va.T0v w || 9 e(pvye vulg || 11 awei\av y' vulg |]

1 1 TrpoayeaBu vulg

·

5. iroXvTrpay/iovetv r. 5.] 'to enquire closely into what was offered him.' For this use of iroXxnrpayfioveTv ' to examine,' with accus., cp. Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. 32 ToXvvpayp.ove'iv rd deibrepov.
ib. toiStt;] sc. tj? bafi/g. 7. tffTaoc] ' drained ' : cp. HXica, Lat. duco, in the same sense. The genitive with airav is cited from Athenaeus and Philo. The reading

rb Sodiv (see critical note) is probably due to iroXuirp. fyiox- to SoSiv above (Bengel).
15. /xvpiidas eicclvas] A reference to Acts xxi 20.
16. irepUTc/ie tov Tt/i.] Actsxvi3. 17. 6 ToX.] Gal. v 2. 18. iw6 yo/iO>'] 1 Cor. ix 20. 19. 6 jtyt. 177.] Phil, iii 7. 23. ohovo/dav] Cp. on el Si ovk &d above : and see Suicer s.v.

24

CHRYSOSTOMUS DE SACERDOTIO

[I. v

7ro\Xot)? iropovi ev Tot? airopoi? evpeiv, Kal ir\i}f/,(ieXeia$ iiravopO&xrat, ^v^?. 7*5- OvSe yap rbv <Pivee<; dvBpo<f>6vov etirotft av eycoye, KaLroi ye /ua 7r\rjyfj Bvo aoifiara dveiXev wcrirep ohBe rbv 'HXiav fierd robs e/carbv arpa5 rimras Kal robs rovrcov rjyefibvas Kal rbv rroXvv rmv aifidrwv ~)(eifidppovv, ov e'/c rrjs rwv iepco/xivcov rois BaifiocTLv eiroirjcre pevcrai crcfrayrjs. "JJ. Et yap rovro o-vy)(copijcrai/jiev, ical ra irpdr/fiard ris r&v rrerroiriKorav rrjs rrpoaipeaems yvfivaxras e^erd^oi icad' eavra, ical rbv io 'Aftpad//, traiBoKrovias 6 /3ov\6/j,evo<} Kpivei, real rbv eyyovov rbv iieeivov ical rbv diroyovov KaKovpyias ical BoXov ypdyjrerai' ovrco yap 6 fiev r&v t9j<; (pvcrecos iKpdrrjcre rrpea-

[SeLwv, o Se rbv rwv Alyvirricov rrXovrov els rbv r&v 'laparfKir&v fierrjveyice crrparbv. 7&- 'A\\' ovk eari 15 ravra, ovk eariv airaye rrjs roXfirjs' ov yap fiovov aiirovs airias d(f>ie/j,ev, dXXd ical Oavfid^ofiev Bid ravra' eTrel ical 6 debs avrovs Bid ravra eTrgvecrev. JQ. Kal yap drrarecbv eKeivos av etr) KaXeladai BiKaios 6 ra> rrpdyfiari Ke%pi)fievos aBiKcos, ical rroXXaKis drrarrfcrai Beov ical rd fieyiarra 20 Bid ravrr}<; w<f>eXr}aai rfjs rej(VT)<}. o Be el; evffeias rrpocreve^Oels icaica fieydXa rbv ovk dirarr)devra elpydaaro.

8 ra vpaypiara ri\% tuv reiroi. irpoaip. tis vulg || 9 Kai tov A/3. waiSoKTOvav airotpai.vop.evos epet z || io eKyovov afwxy || 19 aSiKws] + oux 0 pe8' vyiovs yvufnjs tovto iroitav a'x vulg

In one or two passages of the accepted: Field Honim. in 1 Thess.

de sac. (e.g. iii 11) olnovopda = 500 A. The sense required here is

' office,' 'administration': see Light- ' grandson.'

* foot's discussion of the word, Notes

12. 6 pJv] Jacob: Gen. xxvii.

on Epp. of St Paul p. 319.

13. 6 54] Moses : Ex. xi 2.

2. $iveis] Numb, xxv 7.

14. ovk Igti kt\.] Cp. iii 5 ovrot

3. Katroi. ye] instead of the yap elaiv, ovrot: iii 10 beiviv yap

simple KalToi: it is found again in aXriffws, beivbv. The repetition is

ii 1 (its).

rhetorical: Cognet p. 79.

4. 'H\lai>] 2 Kings i 12: and

15. 4ir<rye t^s t6\ui;s] 'out on

I Kings xviii 40.

their effrontery ' : cp. a7roye rijs

ro. 'Appaap.] Gen. xxii.

fiaw'os iii 5.

id. ^vovok] The distinction

20. &· ev$etas] ' in a straight-

drawn by some between (yyovos= forward manner' : cp. tov in eiffeias ' son ' and £/t7oros ' descendant ' Spo/iov vi 8. does not seem to be universally

Aoros B'.

TaSe eve&TLv iu ra /3' Xoyqj.

I.
II. III. IV. V.
VI. VII.
VIII.

Oti jueyicTTOi' V ieptocrvvr] TiKfn.rjpiov Trj'; eis Xpioroi/ dyamjs.
Oti t] TavTT)<s vir-qpMTia. ttjs TtSv aA.A.on' /*ei£a>v. Oti /jLeyd.Xrj'; Setrai i/'v^s k<u OavixacrTyji. Oti ttoAA^s to irpayp^a SwicoA.ias yipa, /cat kwowcov. Oti t^s eis Xpio-Tov ayaTrrjs evexci' to jrpay/ta ec/w-
yo/tev. A7ro'8a£is T)7? dpenjs toS BacnA.a'ov, «at tijs a.ya.Trq<s Trjs
crc/>o8pas. Oti oix vfipicrai /JovAdjuevoi tovs ^q^Krafxivovi i(pvyop.ev
tt]v \tiporoviav. Oti kou |u.ep.i^<os auToiis d7njAAd|ap.ev Sia. T^s (f>vyrjs.

I. 80. "Ort yUrei/ our eo"Tt /cat eVi. icaXm rrj tjj? a/iram]^ Ke^prjcrOai hwdfiei, fiaWov 8e oti fMT)8e airaTTjv Set to toiovtov icaXelv, aX\' ol/eovo/Aiav Tiva 6avfiaarr)v, evrjv fiev Kal tfKeiova Xeyeiv. eTreiBr) Be ical Ta elpijfieva 7t/jo?

I., II. Chrysostom develops his argument that the deception was for Basil's good, as it was the means of helping him to fulfil the highest duty of a Christian : viz. that imposed by Christ upon St Peter when He bade him 'feed His sheep.' Chrysostom adds that the difficulty of guarding the sheep of Christ is

far greater than any earthly analogy could suggest.
1. iwl Ka\f] 'with good intent.' 2. KexprjoBai] The perfect of XPV"^^1 seems to be occasionally used with a present meaning, perhaps on the analogy of KCKTijaBcu : see Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii (ed. Hort-Mayor) p. 226.

26

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. i

imbBeifyv licava yeyove, (fropriicbv Kal iira/)(8es irepirrbv T<p Xoyq> irpo&TiOevat, p,r)ico<;m abv Be av eirj Bei/cvvvai

Xonrov, ei p/r) t<o irpaypaTi tovtq irpos to KepBoi e%pr)adpeOa to aov, 8l. Kal 6 BaaiXeios · Kat trolov rjp.lv

5 icepBo<;, (jyrjalv, etc Tavrrj<; yeyove tt)<; olicovop,La<;, r) aortas, r) oircos av avTr/v XaLPy> ko-X&v, Xva iretaB&pev oti ovk rjiraTripeda irapa aov; 82. Kat ti tovtov tov icepBovs, e<prjv, av yevoiTO puel^ov, r) to TavTa (palveadai TrpaTTOvrw;, ivnep Beiypara t?)? ei? tov Xpiarbv dydTrr/s avToi eifyrjaev
10 ewai o XpKJTO?; 83. Tlpos yap tov ieopv(f>alov T&v airoo-toKwv Bt-aXeyopevoi, TIeTpe, <f>rjo~lv, <f>iXei<; p.e; tovtov Be opo\oyr]o~avTO<>, eiriXeyei · Et <f)iXei<i fie, iroifxaive to. irpoftaTa

pov. 84. 'E/3(»Ta tov p.a6rjTrjv 6 BtBdaicaXo<;y el (JhXolto Trap' avTov, ov% Xva ai)TO<; puiOy tt&s yap, 6 t<z? awdvTotv 15 ep,/3aTevcov KapBLas; dXTC Xva fjp,as BiBd^r/, oaov avT<£ peXei TJ79 t&v TroipvLcov eVtcrTaCTta? tovtoov. tovtov Be ovtos BrfXov, KaKelvo opoltos earai (pavepbv, oti ttoXv<; Kal acf>aTO<; diro/ceiaeTat p.La66<s tu> irepl Taxna Trovovp,evq>, a 7roWov Tip-arat, o Xpto-ros. 85. Et yap r)pei<{, OTav iBa>p.ev 20 r&v oiKeT&v r) t&v 0pep,paT(ov t&v r)peTepcov eTripueXovp,evov<; Tivas, tj)? irepl 77/ua? dydTrr)? Tr/v els eicelva airovBr)v

13 rjpura cf || 20 om ij ektz

1. tpop. Kal ^7r.] (it would be) ' wearisome and tedious ' : cp. Dem. de Pace 4 oOrus riyovp.ai. ipopriKbv Kal £Tax8is...&oTe airoKvCb. Chrys. frequently imitates Demosthenes : see Introd. p. xxxiii.
2. abv\ i.e. abv tpyov, 'your duty.1
8. <patveff8at xp.] ' to be seen to do.'
10. tov Kopwpaiov] The fact that St Peter is here styled the ' leader ' or 'chief of the Apostles is no
indication of Chrysostom's views with regard to the Roman See : cp. on Srepbs m iv 3 : also Puller The Primitive Saints and the See of Pome3 pp. 117-128.
n. IUrpe] Jn. xxi 15 (SI/wiix

'I(odvov, a7a7r£s fie ir\4ov toOtojv; kt\. WH.),
14. 6 rets diravraiv] The words b...KapSlas form an iambic (senarius comicus). For other instances in the de sac. where the words of Chrys. compose a verse see iii 1 1 (is "KpuTTtapois karl TrpoarjKov dvdpdaiv, iii 14 xpbs toiis dyuvas, padlm A^yX*TM> iv 2 TtMev yap larw eXiriaat. awrriplav ;. In these cases an iambic is formed. At iii 14, toC Kairvov irpoo{<p\e£e Kal fi/mipiiMrev airatraK,
we have a hexameter : and at iii 16, pidfaivrai dia rty ttjs yaarpbs dvdykijv, part of a hexameter.
15. ipfiaTttiw'] 'visiting': used in classical Greek with accus. or gen., not dative.

II. t]

DE SACERDOTIO

2f

TiOkfjLeda (rrjfieiov, kclLtoi ye ravra irdvra yjsr)fiaTa>v £<tt\v rnvr/rd' 6 /Mr/ ^prjfidraiv fi7)Se aXXov two? toiovtov, aXfC iSt'o) Oav&Ttp to iroifiviov irpidfievo'; tovto Kal ti[at)v tt)<; 076X179 to alfia Sov? to eavTov, ir6<rp tol"? jroip.aivovra'i

avro dfieiyfreTai Scoped; Sid toi tovto eltrovTOS tov fiaQrj- 5 tov' 86. 2v olSa<;, Kvpie, oti (f>iX61)~cre, Kal fiAprvpa tjj? dydirt]^ ai)Tov tov dyairmfievov KaXecravTO^' ovk bo-tt) /^eXP1, tovtov 6 aa>Tr)p, dXXa Kal to tt)? dydirr}<; trpoaedrjKe o-rjfielov. 87. Ov yap ocrov 6 IleTpo? avTov ecf>iXei, Tore

eiriSei%ai ifiovXeTo (koI yap eic ttoXXwv tovto rjSrj rjfuv 10 yeyove SrfXov) ' dXX, ocrov avTO? tt)v e/c/cXrjcriav dyaira ttjv eavTov, Kal UeTpov Kal irdvTas r)fia<; fiadelv r)0eXr)o-ev, iva Kal 17/^ei? TroXXrjv irepl avTa elcnpepco/xev ttjv crirovSrjv. 88. Ata t'l yap viov Kal fiovoyevov<; ovk &<peio-aTo 6 #eo<?, dXX bv fjuovov ei%ev, efjeScoKev ; Xva tov<> e^pwSw? 7T/30? 15 avTov SiaKeifievovs eavTW KaTaXXa^r) Kal iroirjcrr) Xaov irepiovcriov. Bid ti Kal to aifia i^e^eev ; iva Ta irpojUaTa KTijo~i)Tai TavTa, a ra UeTpco Kal Tot? fieT eKeivov eve^eipicrev. 89. Eikotg)? dpa Kal SiKaicot eXeyev o X/jto"T09" Ti? dpa 6 7Tto-To? BovXos Kal cppovifios, bv KaTacnrjcrei 0 20

5 avrnv y' vulg || 8 tovtuv c vulg || 13 ircpi ravra emu vulg || 15 e%Spwscu || 18 evextipifc" ayz || 19 om xai Sataiws vulg || 20 0/xwijuos] + oucoSo/xm afxyz henr || Karearnoev vulg

1. xpv£''fc»'...iii''r;T(£] 'may be bought with money' : the gen. is one of price, cp. <5\Xou rivbs tolovtov (next line). 'ISlcp Savirip, on the other hand, is dative of the instrument : 'by means of His own death.'
3. nuty t. d-y.] 'as the price of His flock.'
7. rbv dyaKiifievov] i.e. Christ. ib. o6k torn ptyp' T0 ' did not stop at this point ' : cp. iii 15 ovb~k fiixpi roirwv XoTavrai p.bvov, ii 7 oibi fidxP' frvotas reT6\fir)Tai : and (in an affirmative sentence) ii 2 fUxpi w X/wiMiTW 'h i^M<>; iii 8 b xlrSwos awpjiTiKov p.£xfi<- Oavarov. See Mason Five Orations p. 36. 14. vlov Kal fiovoy.] 'even His

only-begotten Son' : Jn i 18, iii 16. ib. ovk tQelaaro] Rom. viii 32. 16. \abv irepio&riox] Tit. ii 14.
Chrys. himself explains icepioio-iov (Homtn. in Tit. 759 d) as tfciheypJvov, ovSiv t%ovTa KOivbv wpbs robs \0t1r0is. See also Ex. xix 5, Deut. vii 6 (lxx).
18. np Uerpip kt\.~\ The successors of Peter are bishops in every country and every age : Puller /. c.
20. t(s &pa ktX.] Matt, xxiv 45 ; cp. Lk. xii 42. Instead of 4irl tt)s oUeTelas {Sepawelas) of the Gospels, Chrys., quoting from memory, gives ^7rl ttjc oUlav. WH. read jcar^OTnotv in Matt., Karao-ripei in Lk.

28

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. I

Kvpio<; avrov iirl tt/v oiiciav avTov ; ttoKlv ra fiev prjfiaTa diropovvTOt, 6 Se (pdeyyofievo'i axna ovk airop&v i<f>0iyyeTO ·
a\V aHTirep tov Uirpov epwTwv, el qbiXoiTO, ov fiaOelv Seo/zevo? tov fiaOrfTov tov iroQov rjpd>Ta, dXXa 8el^ai 5 /3ovXofievo<; rrjs oliceias dydirrfs tt/v inrepftoXrjv, ovtco ical vvv Xeycov Tt? dpa 6 ttio-to<; SovXo<; ical tppovifio^ ; ov tov Triarov ical (ppovtfiov dyvo&v eXeyev, dXXd Trapao~Tr\o~ai QeXwv to tov TrpdyficiTos airdviov, ical t?}? «/>%»?? TavTrj? to fieyedo<{. opa yovv ical to eiradXov bcrov" E7rt iraat 10 Tot? virdpyovcriv avTov KaTaaT-qaei avrov. 90. "Eti ovv d/Kpia^rfTycrei'; rffilv tov pur) tcaXa><; r/TraTrjaOai, iracrt, fieXXwv e-rriaTijo-ecrdai tov 0eov t<h? vTrdp%ovo~i, ical ravra wpaTTCov, a ical tov UeTpov iroiovvTa ecprjcre ZwrjcrecrOai t&v dirocrToXccv virepcucovTio-ai tov<; Xonrov<;. TleTpe yap, 1 5 (pTjcn, (piXels fie TrXelov tovtcov ; iroifiaive Ta irpofiaTa fiov. 91. Kahoi y ivfjv eiirelv 777309 avTov, Ei qbiXels fie, vifcrTeiav daicei, ycbfievvLav, aypvnvias ctvvtovovs, Trpoto~Tao~o t&v dSiicovfievtov, yivov optpavols &>? TraTrjp, ical dvTL dvBpo<; Tr/

1 e7Ti rajs otKias c II 9 iroaav fxz oliv |1 10 avTov] + (pr/ffiv vulg || 13 irparruv abfxyz henr || efrrjKe y vulg || 14 rtav a7ro0To\wj>] Kat, twv airoffToXojv vulg II r5 om trot/juiive ra Tpoftara fiov c

I. ra iikv prip.aTa] sc. iarl. 'The words indicate perplexity? For the construction cp. vi 11 tovto oiiS&v Zrepov Stj\ouvt6s icrnv rj kt\. (note).
7. TrapacrTtjcrai kt\.] ' desirous of proving how rare this is' (i.e. fidelity).
12. raura irpdrrtav kt\.] The order of the words is o tcoiovvto. rbv IHTpov ?0j)<re kt\. : ' by doing which Peter would be able (so Christ said) to surpass' etc. The subject of tyrjcre is 6 Xpwr<Ss (to be supplied from the context). For the general structure of the sentence cp. ii r txtrep Sely/tara rijs . . .aydwris ai)r6s i<j>t\cttv eTxai 6 Xpiffr6s, ii 11 (IkcWus dpa Trj$...ayaTnjs rijif...cnrovSTjv 0

K6pi.os2<pricrei>eli>at.crr)/j.e7oi>. 'E<pi)Kev, ' permitted,' which is the vulgate reading, could not take a future infin. {dvvtiacffdai).
16. VT)<TTeLai>] Chrys. often maintains the necessity of fasting (especially during Lent) : cp. iii 1 2, vi 5 : Puech p. 2 14.
17. xaflvv^av1 ' couching on the ground ' : a species of mortification of the flesh practised by ascetics in all ages: cp. Horn. //. xvi 235 (of the SeXXoi, priests at Dodona) dviTrbiroSes X'V'^vai, Chrys. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. 11 59 B tartis Si /cal avvirSderos ical xalxa^ KadevSirw : see also DCA ' Mortification.'
18. ylvov 6p<f>avoh lis ir.] Ecclus. iv 10.

II. i]

DE SACERDOTIO

29

pyrjrpl avr&v. vvv Be irdvra ravra dfals t'l (fyrjat; Tloipaive rd trpo^aTa fiov. II. 92. 'Eieelva p,ev yap, a irpoelwov, Kal t&v dp^opevwv ttoXXoI BivaivT av eiriTeXelv 'paBias, ovk dvBpei; fiovov, aXXd Kal yvvalices · orav Be eKKXt/eria^ wpoo-Tfjvai. Bey Kal ·^·v^&v iirip,eXeiav irio-Tev- $

Ofjvai ToaovTtov, irdcra pev r) yvvaiKeia <f>vo~i<; Trapa^mpeiTO) t& fieye0ei tov TrpdypaTOS, Kal dvBp&v Be to irXeov 93. dyecrOaiaav Be et? peaov 01 iroXXm t& p,erpw irXeoveKrovi'Te? diravTcav, kol,i toctovtov vtyrfkorepot, t&v aXXwv Kara tt)v tt)? ^uX^* oWe? dpeTr)v, oaov tov TravTO<; eOvov? 10 'Eiftpalav Kara to tou o-(bpaTo<; peye6o<; 6 %aoiiX, pdXXov Be Kal 7roX\d5 irXeov. 94. Mr) yap pot povov VTrepcopias evTavOa ty)Teia6a> p,erpov, dXX ocrrj irpbs rd aXoya t&v XoyiK&v dvOpcoTrav r) Biacpopd, tcktovtov tov Troipevos Kal > t&v 7roifj,aivo/j,iv(ov eo-T(o to peaov, iva p,r) ical vXeov tl 15 etir<o' Kal yap irepl troXXw pet^ovcov o kivBvvo<;. 95- 'O pev yap irpofiaTa diroXkvs, rj Xvkcdv dpiracrdvTcov r) Xtjo-t&v iirio-ravTiov, rj Xotp,ov tivos rj Kal aXXov o-vp7TTcopaTO<: eiriirea6vTO<i, tv%oi pev dv twos Kal o~vyyvd>p,r](; trapd tov Kvpiov t>7? irolpLVW el Be Kal Bikt/v diraiToiTO, pA^pt t&v 20 j^pr/paTCDV r) fyqpla. 6 Be dvdpunrov; irio-TevOels, to XoyiKov tov H.pt,o-Toi) trolpviov, trp&Tov p,ev OVK ei? xPVriaTa> dXX' et? ttjv eavTOV yjrvxrjv ttjv foplav ixpicrTaTai, inrep Tr/9 twv

5 efiTUTTevBrivai fx

II. 5. tripiktuw v.] For the accus. with irusreivsBai cp. Rom. iii 1 (iTriareiBriaav tA \671a rou Oeov), 1 Cor. ix 17. Verbs which in the active take a dative of the person and an accus. of the thing retain the latter in the passive: Lightfoot Notes on Epp. of St Paul p. 11.
8. oi iroWifi kt\.] 'those who are far beyond all others' For r\eoi>KTtv with gen. cp. iv 7 tux 8\\uv airoffToXdJv iTrXeov^KTijffev 6 p.a.K&pios.
11. 4 SaotfX] 1 Sam. ix 2. 12. iircpw^ias] 'the part above

the shoulders' : so used in the LXX at 1 Sam. ix 2, x 23.
13. Sat] irpds ktX.] 'let the difference between shepherd and sheep be as great as the distinction between rational and irrational creatures ' : i.e. between men and animals. For examples of this use of to /ifoov see Index III: and for the variation t\ Sia<j>opd...TO ptaov cp. vi 5 t4 6id(popoi>...Tb n4<rov.
20. el 5e Kal 51kt]v ktX.] 'even if he were called on to make reparation.'

30

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. n

Trpoftdraiv dTra>Xe£a<;. 96. "Ei7reira Kal rov dywva ttoXXu) fiel^ova Kal ^aXeiraTepov e^et. oil yap avrm irpds Xvkow; 7) fid^r), ovSe virep XycrTwv BeSoiicev, ovSe 'Iva Xoifibv direXdarj t?)? ttoijivi]^ <f>povTi£ei. 97. AXXa 717)09 Tivas 5 6 7ro\e^to? ; pera tlvwv r\ fid^rj ; aKove rod fiaicapiov HavXov Xeyovrof Ovk sotiv 7)pXv f] irdXr} 77-/009 al/xa Kal crdpiea,, aXXd irpos to? dp-^d^, 717)09 t<X9 i^ovcrias, 777509 rov? Koafio/cpdropas rov ctk6tov<; rov al&vo? tovtov, 777)09 rd ·jrvevfiariKa tjj9 irovr)pla<;, iv T0Z9 eirovpavioK. elBes 10 iroXe/MLCov ifXfjdos Seivov, teal <f>dXayya<; dyp[a<;, ov o-iSijpq) ire<ppay/J.eva<;, dXX' dvrl irdo-r)<; TravoTrXias dpKOVfievas rji (pvaet; 98. BouAet teal erepov aTparoirehov ISelv dirr)ve<i Kal wp,bv, ravTr/ irpoaeSpevov rrj trolfivr/ ; teal rovro dnro 7-779 avT>7? oyfret irepi(o,irf)<;. 6 yap irepl iteeLvaiv 8iaXe%6el<;, 15 outo? Kal tox/tov; r/filp vtroheiKVvei 7-01)9 e%#poi)9, w8e 7ra>9 Xeywv <Pavepd Be icm rd ttjs aapKov epya, Srivd ean, tropveia, fioi-^eia, atcadapaia, daeXyeia, elBeoXoXarpeia, (pap/jMtcela, eyQpau, epeis, ^fjXoi, Ovfioi, ipideuu, tearaXaXial, -ifridvpiffftol, <pvo-t,d)o-ei<s, dtcaTaa-Taaiai, Kal erepa 20 tovtwv irXeiova. ov yap irdvra KareXe^ev, aXX* etc tov-

4 tppovTifei] post hoc, verba aXXa jus tovs Tnarevovras dtaauxn} a-jro toiv aei efedpevovTW Saifioviiiv ' on irpos tovtovs km fiera Tovrtav 7} fiaxi], aKove rov /uucapiov IlauXou ktX. habent htz || 5 /laxt] toXij cfmnpuw berl || 14 exeiywc] + r/iuv vulg || 15 virodeiKMffi vulg || exBpovs] opovs c || 18 <papfiaKeiai fyz henr

6. oiK tarty wo"] Eph. vi 12
(tov <tk6tovs roirov WH., omitting rod aiwvos).
11. 6.vtX irdffTis ktX.] 'content with nature (i.e. their natural ferocity) instead of any suit of armour.'
12. ffrpardTrebov] 'army' The simile of the two armies is more fully worked out in vi 12.
ib. &irr)vts Kal ci/^] ' cruel and savage.'
13. irpoaeSpcvov] See on i 1 (TpoaeSpetiovTa).

14. Trepiomijs] l place of vantage?
commanding a wide view. 15. (55^ irojs Xtywv'] Gal. v 19
and 7. Cor. xii 20: cf. Rom. i 29. See Lightfoot Galatians3 p. 49, and his notes on v 19. WH. read to. tpya rijs vapKos (not ret t. a. i-pya.), Ipis not (put, fijXos not f^Xoi, and omit /wixda. KaraXaXial and the three following words are from 1 Cor. xii 20.
18. (papfiaKela = ' witchcraft': ipi0eiat=' caballings,' 'factiousness.'

II. II]

DE SACERDOTIO

31

twv d<jyrJKev elBevai Kal ra \onra. 99- Kat etri, /xev tov ·Troifiivos twv akoywv, ol /3ov\6/j.evoi BtacpBelpai ttjv dyeXTjv,

OTav tBwai tov i<f>e<TTtoTa (pevyovTa, ttjv irp6<; itceivov fid'YTjv d<pevTe<; apKovvrai, ttj twv Bpep.p.aTWv dpirayrj' ivTdvda Be, kov airaaav Xdfiwo-t, ttjv TroifiVTjv, ovS" ovtco 5 tov Troifj.alvovTO'i afyiaTavTai, aXXa fiaXXov e<peaTT)Kao-t, Kal irXeov 6pao~vvovTai, Kal ov irpoTepov iravovTai, ew? av rj KaTa/3dXwo~tv iicetvov r\ vikt\Qwo~lv avTOi. IOO. IIpo? Be TouTot? Tii fiev twv dpe/ifiaTcov voa^fiwra KaOeaTr/ice (pavepd, tcav At/xo? fi, kov Xoifios, ko,v Tpav/ia, kov OTtBr/iroTovv eTepov io rj to Xvirovv ov fiiKpov Be tovto BvvaiT av 77730? ttjv twv evo'xXovvTwv diraXXayrjv. IOI. "E^t Be ti Kal erepov tovtov fiel^ov, to ttoiovv Ta%eiav t??? appwo~Tia<s eiceivqs rr)v Xvaiv. tL Be tovto io~Ti; p,era TroXXfj<; tt)? e£ovcrla<; kclto.vayKa^ovai to. irpofSaTa ol iroifieves Be'xeo-dai Trjv larpelav, 15

OTav eicovTa p,ij vTrofievy. Kal yap Brjcrai evKoXov, OTav Kavaai Berj xal Tefielv Kal (f>vXa^ai evBov cttI ^povov tvoXvv, r)viKa av tovto avjupepr) · Kal erepav Be avQ1 erepas

irpoaayayelv Tpocprjv, Kal diroKwXvo~ai vafiaTwV Kal to, aXXa Be irdvra, oaa trep av BoKifidawo-i irpoi ttjv eKeivwv 20 vyleiav o~Vflf3aXeo~dai, //.era ttoXXt}<; Trpoadyovo-i tt}<; evKOXta?. 102. Td? Be twv dvdpwirwv dppwo-Tia<; irpwTOv fiev ovk eo~Tiv dvOpwirw paBiov IBeiV ovBel<{ yap ocBe to tov

1 ttjv iroifxytjv cxy vulg || 6 tov iroifxevos cxy vulg ]| 9 irpojSaTwv abfxyz henr || 14 n dm fx || 19 irpoaayuv vulg || 21 o-v/j.pa\\e<r6at. vulg || 23 oide(x)] + avf)pwTwi> yz vulg

I. iirl /±iv t. 7T.] 'in the case of the shepherd.'
10. ko\v &ti8. kt\.] ' whatever else the trouble may be. '
16. Srav Kavaai ictX.] 'when it is necessary to use cautery or the knife'': i.e. to resort to drastic methods of treatment. Cp. ii 3 raD<rcu xal Tep.(iv, Greg. Nyss. Or. Co/. 8 (p. 46 Srawley) toixoL Kal Kavr^pta.
19. van&T<ji>] 'water' {adv. oppugn. vit. monast. II 61 a): a word

chiefly used in verse, but also in prose by Plato.
23. otiSels yip kt\.] i Cor. ii n, apparently cited from memory. WH. read t/s yap dtiev dv$pdwwr to tov dvdptliTov el p.i) kt\. The present passage has been used to illustrate the attitude of Chrys. towards confession. While he sometimes lays stress on the power of the priest to forgive sins (iii 5), at other times he urges sinners to confess directly to God: de incom-

32

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. n

dvOpmnrov, el firj to irvevfia tov dvdpdnrov to iv avTm. Ill, 7raJ? ovv Tt? irpocraydyot t^<? vogov to <f>dpp,aKov, r)<} tov Tpoirov ovk olBe, TroXXaKis Be firjBe el Tvyydvoi voawv Swdfievos crvviBetv ; 1 03- 'JLireiBdv Be Kal KaTacpavrj? 5 yevrjTat, Tore trXeiov avTw trape^ei Tr)v Bvcr^epeiav. ov yap eo-Ti fiTa TocravTrjs i%ovo-ia<s atravTas Oepaireveiv dvOponrovs, p,ed' 00-779 to irpofiaTov 6 Troip,ijv. eo-Tt, p.ev yap Kal ivTavda ical Bfjo-at,, zeal Tpo<pr}<; direlp^ai, Kal Kavcrai, ical Tefielv dXX' r) i^ovcria tov Se^acrdai ttjv io laTpeiav ovk iv tw irpoadyovTi to <pdpp.aKov dXX' r) iv tc3 xdfivovTi KeiTai. tovto yap Kal 6 0avp,dcrios eKeivos dvrjp avveiBw^ KopivOiois eXeyev Ov% oti Kvpievofiev vfiGiv T77? Trio-Tew;, dXXa avvepyoi iap,ev tt;? ")(apa<; vfi&v. 1 04. MdXiaTa p,ev yap dirdvrwv Xpio-TiavoK ovk itpelrai Trpbi /Slav 15 inravopQovv to. t&v dfiapTavovTav tnaiapLaTa. dXX' 01 p,ev efjcoOev BiKacnal toi><; KaKovpyov; OTav vtto rot? v6p,ot<; Xd/3(Dcri, TroXXrjv itnBeiKVWTai tt)V i^ovcriav, Kal d.K0VTa<: Tot? Tpoirois K(oXvovo~i ^prjcrOai to?5 avT&v' evTavQa he ov /3ta%6fievov dXXa nreLQovTa Bel iroielv dfielvco tov toiovtov.

5 hwKaknv Cx vulg || 10 uW e» tw Kafwovn yz vulg || 12 avvibutv mnuy vulg

prehensibili v 7 (490 c) : see Puech p. 212, Montfaucon Diatriba I.
For Chrysostom's views on the subject of penance see Introd. p. xxi sq.
III. In cases of spiritual sickness among his flock, the Christian shepherd must use gentle, in preference to drastic, remedies.
6. aTrai/Tot] This word has been suspected, and various conjectures (Kd/ivoyras, dKovras) have been made. But the text seems to be right. Alt men cannot be treated with a high hand, though some can : cp. vi 4 oi yap ko~nv ivl Tpbirip Xpwdai rots dpxo/J^voiS aircunv, iweiSt) iiriSe . . .hi vb/up rofs Kaitvovai irafft irpoa<ptpea0ai KaXbv.
II. b 8avp.i<rios...&v/ip] St Paul:

the passage here cited is 2 Cor. i 24.
14. X/hoticu'<ms] We may recall the fact that this name was first given to the disciples in Chrysostom's native city, Antioch : Acts xi 26, cp. Homm. in Matt. 116 A. The right, or at least the expediency, of persecution for religious belief is here contested : see on this Puech pp. 202 sqq. The practice of Chrysostom was not always on a level with his precepts, as Puech shews.
15. oi /iiv tijaOev] See on i 4 (tous (%u0ev).
16. inrb rots vb^ots] Cp. vi 12 Orb toU bpffots aird tWijo-i "Koyiafwis.

II. in]

DE SACERDOTIO

33

I05- OvTe yap r)filv i^ovcria Tocravrr/ trapa T&v vojxwv BeBorai Tryso? to KooXveiv tow afiapTavovTas, ovts, el ical eowtcav, ei%ofiev owoi ical xpijaofieda ttj Bvvdfiet,' ov tow dvdytcr) rr}? ica/cua?, aKXa tow trpoaipecret, TauTT/s dire·ypiievovs o-T<pavovvTO<; tov Oeov. 106. Aid tovto ·7roWr)<; 5
XPeia rV^ HiVXavV^> iva TreiaOwaiv e/covres eavTow virexeiv Tals irapa twv lepecov depaTreiaf; 01 icdfivovTev' ical ov tovto yudvov, aK)C iva ical ydpiv elB&cri tj)? laTpelas avTols. 107. "Aj» Te yap ti? cncipTrjo-r/ BeOelt (jcvpios yap iaTi tovtov), ^et/oov elpydcraTO to Beivov' dv t tow criBrfpov 10 Tep.vovTa<; Blicr/v TrapaTre/j,ylrrjTai \6yow, trpoo-eOrjice Bid T?j9 icaTacppovrjo-eax; Tpavp-a eTepov, ical yeyovev r) tt;? QepaireLas irpocpao-is vocrov ^a\e7T(»Te/3a9 viroOeais. 6 yap KaTavayKa^cov ical d/covTa Oepairevcrai Bvvdfievo<; ovk eo~Ti. IV. 108. Tt ovv dv Tt? troirjo-eie ; ical yap idv 15 irpaoTepov Trpoo~eve')(6y'S Tfp iroWfjs dtroTOriia<; Beo/j,evq>, ical fir) Sou? ftadelav ttjv TOfir)v toS TOiavTrj<; ^petai/ ej(pvTi, to /xev irepiiicoyfrai;, to Be d<pr)ica<: tov TpavfiaTOS. 109. K.av dcpeiBcb1! tt)v 6<pet\.ofiivT)v eiraydyrji TOfir/v, 7ro\Xa/a?

I ov yap fxyz vulg || 3 oirou xfl"- vu'g II 4 Kaxias] + airexo/xexoi/t vulg || 6 Treuraxrtv eKovras...Tovs Ka/wovras abcfxyz || 9 tij] irore y vulg || Kvptos Se £<tti ch || 17 tt)i> ir\rjyr]v Cx vulg

2. aire el nal ktX.] 'and even

ib. 6... Karat/ay*.] Cp. oil i 1

if they (the laws) gave the power, (6 KiaXiaiov oiSels).

we should not know how (lit. to what

IV. Theparticular kind oftreat-

purpose) to use it: since God crowns ment will vary with the character

(rewards) not those who are forcibly of each individual, and this must be

kept from evil, but those who delibe- carefully studied. Excessive severity

rately refrain from it.'

. may be very harmful: on the other

9. utipios yip i. t.] 'for he can hand, offenders must not be allowed

still do this ' (in spite of his bonds). to go altogether unpunished.

10. elpydaaro] gnomic aorist.

On the subject of this chapter,

ib. av re rotis kt\.] 'and if he viz. the differences of individual

neglect the words which cut like temperament and the need for study-

steel' : i.e. sharp words of rebuke. ing them, cp. vi 4, and see Gore

ZiH-qpov Slap' are to be taken to- The Church and the Ministry* p.

gether: cp. (fxoriis Statin 'like a 146. Gregory the Great gave the

light ' vi 4, kixtvov SIkt]v vi 8 sub matter special prominence in his

fin.

Regula Pastoralis (ii, iii).

13. vwbBeaii] 'foundation.'

N. C.

3

34

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. iv

diroyvovs irpbt t<j? dXyr)86va<; exelvo<i, d0p6a><; irdvTa diropptyas, ical to (pdp/iaicov ical rbv eiriBeapbov, <f>epcov eavTov KaTexpij/ivtae, o-vvTpityas top £vybv ical Bi,ap"pr)^a<s top heafiov. ical iroXXovs av e^oifii Xeyew, tovs els ecry^ara 5 e%oicelXavTa<; icaicd, Bid to Blicrjv diraiTrjOrjvai t&v apupTrjpArwv d%iav. I IO. Oil yap dirX&s irpb<; to t£>v dpapTfjp,drcov pArpov Bel ical ttjv etriTtpiav eirdyeiv, dXXd ical Trjs t&v ap,apTav6vT(ov aTo^d^eaOai ·jrpoat,pe<reui<;' p,r\ iroTe pdyfrai to Bieppa>yb<; /3ovXop,evo<;, %elpov to o-yLo-pM, jroii]o-T)<}, 10 ical dvopd&o-ai to KaTaireTnaicbt; cnrovBd^av, p.ei%ova epydarj tt/v ttt&ctiv. III. Oiyap do-0evel<; ical BiaKe%vp.evoi, ical to TrXeov ttj tov icocrpiov irpoaBeBep-evoL Tpv(pf), eTi he ical ewrl yevei ical 8vvao~Teiq p.eya <j>povelv e%ovTe<>, ypepa [lev ical KaTa pMcpov, ev 0I9 av dp.apTavcoo'cv, eiri,aTpe(p6p,evoi, 15 SvvaivT av, el ical p.rj TeXeov, dXXd yovv etc p.epov<; t&v KaTeypvTmv avTovs diraWayrjvai, icaic&V av Be dOpoov Tt? eiraydyr] tt/v ·nalBevo'iv, ical t^5 eXaTTOvos avTOvs
direo'Teprjae 8t,op6d>o~eco<;. 112. "'ifvxv ydp eireiBdv dira^ direpvdptdo-ai ftiacrOr}, els dvaXyqaiav imriirrei, ical ovre 20 Trpoo~r)veat,v eiicet Xoyois Xonrbv, ovre aTreiXals Kap/ineTai, ovTe eiiepyecrlais irpoTpeireTai,, dXXa ylveTai ttoXv ^eipmv Trjs TroXems eiceCvrjs, rjv 6 irpocpiJTT)? icaici£(ov eXeyev' "O^jris iropvrjs eyevero aoi, aTrr)vaio-)(yvTr\o-a<i irpbs "irdvTas. 113. Ata tovto iroXXrjs Bel ttjs avveaeoas to3 iroip,evt, ical

I airavra pi\pas Cx vulg || 5 TapairTio/xaTuiv vulg || 12 SeSe/iexoi yz || 15 a\V ow £KHipovs fpxyz || 16 adpoav vulg || 17 TraiSeiav x vulg || r8 eis 07ra{ vulg || 19 efiwiwrei f || 21 ovk evepy. vulg || 23 rpos] «s y

1. Airoyvois ktX.] ' in despair at his sufferings. '
2. <pipu»>~\ Cp. on i 4 (iptpovres iveffr/Kau-ev).
3. avvrpl^/as t. f.] Jer. v 5. 5. i^0Kel\avras] 'stranded,' 'run aground.' q. t6 dicfijiwySs] 'the torn part' (Siafip^yvv/u) : cp. Matt, ix 16. 11. foaicexiWi'oi] 'dissipated':

cp. Homtn. in Matt. 354 A yvvatKa «ro\\jj tj rpv<py Siaxeo/ji4i>i}i>.
18. ^«x^ yip <crX.] Compare the similar passage ad Theodorum lafisum I 27 c ^vxh yap iiretSiv aira| dirayopei<rji tt\v au-rtiplav rrpi iavrijs kt\.
19. airepvdp.] 'to lose the sense 0/ shame.'
22. 0 7rpo0i}Ti)s] Jer. iii 3.

II. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

35

fivpioov 6<p0aXfi5>v, irpbs to trepivKotreiv irdvToBev rr)v Trjs ^frv^rfs e^iv. 114. "Q,<nrep yap els dirovoiav atpovrai ttoXXoI Kal els diroyvwaiv Trjs eavT&v KaTwirlirTovo-i aco- · rr/pias, airb tov fir) BvvrjOrjvai iriKp&v dvaayeadai cpapfu'iKtoV ovrcos elo~l rives, 01 Sid to fir) Bovvai rifiwpiav ra>v 5 afiaprrffidrmv dvTipporrov, els oXiyaplav eKTpeirovrai, Kal iroXXS ylvovrai ^eipovs, Kal irpbs to fiei^ova dfiaprdveiv irpodyovrai. 1 1 5. Xpr) roivvv fir/Bev tovtcov dve^eTaarov acpelvai, aXXd Trdvra Biepevvrjo-dfievov aKpifS&s, KaraXXtjXats to. Trap eavrov irpoaayeiv tov lepiofievov, iva fir) 10 fidraios avTrn yiyvrjTai r) airovBrj. 1 1 6. Ovk ev tovtm Be fiovov, aXXd Kal ev to5 tu direpprfyfieva Trjs e/CKXr/crlas fieXr) avvaTrreiv, iroXXd 1B01 tis av avTov e%ovTa irpdyfiaTa. II/. 'O fiev yap tS>v TrpofSaTrnv iroifirjv ej(ei to iroifiviov hrofievov, fpirep av rjyrJTai' el Be Kal eicrpeiroiTo riva Trjs 15 evdelas 6B0O, Kal tt)v dyaOr)v d<j)ievTa vofirjv XerrToyea Kal d-n-oKprjfiva ftoaKOiro ympia, dp/cei f3orjo-avra a-<f>oBpoTepov trvveXdaai ttoXiv, Kal els tt)v iro'ifivr)v eiravayayeiv to ywpio-Qev' Il8. el Be dvdpmiros Trjs evOeias aTroTrXavrjffeir) ma-Tews, iroXXrjs Bel t&> iroifievi Trjs rrpayfiaTeias, Trjs 20 Kaprepias, Trjs virofiovfjs. ov yap eXKvaai irpbs f3iav earlv, ovBe dvayKaaai cpoftcp' ireiaavra Be Bel irdXiv irpbs t^v dXr/deiav dyayeiv 60ev e^eireae Tr)v dp'xrjv. 1 1 9. Tevvaias ovv Bel ^v^rjs, iva fir) irepiKaKrj, 'iva fir) diroyivcoo-Kfj
rrjv to>v ireirXavr)fiev<ov o-a>TT)piav, iva avvej(ms eKeivo Kal 25

9 aicpipws icai (cot. f || 11 /xova vulg || 16 \eirroyaia abiz Xe7rn>7eia henr [| 17 eTrocpi/iUxo fp || 23 CTrai'aYcryei!' ex || 25 v\avw/ievioi> ex vulg

2. i.irbvauu/\ 'arrogance ' : cp. on i 4.
9. KaTaX\i}Xws] 'correspondingly : the adj. is found at iv 3 rpo<pal ...KOTdXX7)Xoi.
16. Xott. ical (for.] 'barren and precipitous.' Thucydides (i 2) uses Xe7TT67e<os in reference to the soil of Attica. Field (ffomm. in 1 Cor.

239 a) prefers the form XeirrSyatos : see also critical note on v 8 (\errr6yeuv).
20. wpaypuirdas] 'care,' ' industry.'
24. IVa htj irepiKaicy] 'lest he despair.' The verb is cited from Polybius by L. and S.

36

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. IV

Xoyltyjrai ical Xeyy Mrjirore 8m avrols 6 6eb<; iiriyvmcriv dXrjdeias, ical drraXXaymcn rfjf rov SiaftoXov ·jrayiBo?.

' 120. Aid ravra rol<; paOrjrals 6 Kvpios BiaXeyop^vos e<f>rj~ Tt? apa 6 7TK7T0? BovXos ical <ppovipo<i ; o p,ev yap eavrm
5 daicmv 49 eavrov pavov rrepuarTjai rrjv dxpeXeiaV rb Be rrj<; TroipavTUcrjii icep8o<; et9 lirravra hiafiaivet, rov Xaov. ical 6 pev yj>r\para Biavepmv Tot? BeopJvot,?, rj ical erepm<; 7r&)9 dBiicovpevoK dp.vvmv, mvrjcre pev ri ical o5to9 tou? irXtjcriov, roaovrm Be eXarrov rov lepecos, ocrov rb p,io~ov
10 amparos 77-/309 yjrvx^v. 121. Et«oVft)? apa t^9 el<; avrov 07077-779 rrjv irepl rd ·noip.via cnrovBrjv 6 icvpios ecprjcrev

eivai arrjpeiov. 122. Sw Be, <f>T)crtv, 011 (piXelt rov Xpto-ToV; Ifi. Kae
cpiXai ical cpiX&v ov rravo'op.al rrore' BeBoiica Be pr) irapor5 i;vvco rov cpiXovpevov vrr epou. 123. Kat ri rovrov
yevoir av alviypd, (prjaiv, acracpecrrepov ; ei o pev Xpiaro? rov cpiXovvra avrov iroip.at.vetv Trpocrerafjev avrov rd rrpofiara, av Be Bid rovro </>j?9 ov rroip.aiveiv, erreiBr) rov rovro Trpocrrdfjavra cpiXeh. 1 24. Ovk eariv aiviypa, ecprjv, 6 20 \0yo9, tod icai Xiav cracpr/<f ical airXov?. el p.ev yap lKava><; eymv BioiKrjaai rrjv ap%rjv ravrrjv, Ka9w<; 6 XpttrTO? rjOeXrjaev, elra dire<pvyov, eBei irpb<; rb trap epov Xeyopevov drropeiv erreiBrj Be a^prjcrrov pe 77-/309 rr)v BiaicovLav ravrrjv r) 7-779 tyvxrj'i dcrOeveia icadiarrjcri, rrov ^rjrf]aem<i

2 5 a%Lov rb Xeyopevov; 125. Kot yap BeBoiica, p,rj rrjv

I einyvwGu/ kt\.~\ neravoiav cis tmyvwaiv a\r)$eias, km avavqifiwaiv ck (a7ra\Xa7w(rt) njs kt\. iyz vulg |] 4 ev eavrw htz (vet int in se solo) eavrov u || 8 eTafiwav fhx || ovriffi (sic) vulg || 9 o<r&> vulg || 10 jrpos V'^X7?*'] Kat }PvX7ii abhiyz henr |i 21 exWI/] ^Xov y*z

1. /iTJirorc kt\.~\ 2 Tim. ii. 25, 26. WH. read firfiroTe Sipri airois 0 debs /ierdvotav eh iirlyvwoiv dXijffe/as, koX avavipputaiv ^k ttjs tov 5ia/3. wayldos.
4. t(s apa] Matt, xxiv 45: cp. ii 1 .
9. t6 pJ<rov] Cp. on ii 2 (Sen;

irpbs ktX.). Xiifiaros lrpbs ^/vxv" is here used instead of atbfmTos nal ^i»x^s, the more usual form (found in some mss).
24. irov fijTfoews kt\.] ''why do you quarrel ivith my words?': lit ' in what do they call for enquiry ? *

II. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

37

dyeKrjv tov XpttrToi) o-tppiy&aav Kal evrpcufffj irapaXaftcbv, eira vtto 7779 direipias \vfir)va/j,evo<;, Trapoljvva) /car ifiavtov tov o£/T6>9 avTTjv dyairrfcravTa debv <a? eavTov itcb'ovvai Bid tt)v Tavrrpi o-ooTr/piav re teal rifirfv. 1 26. Uai£wv Xeyets ravrd, §r\aiv, el yap ov trai^mv, ovk olSa 7rw? av 5 T6pw? fiaWov r)fid<; d"ireBei%a<; BiKalws dA/yowTa?, r) Bid twv pTjfidrmv tovtwv, Bi wv diroKpovcraadai ttjv ddvfiiav eaTrovBao-as. eyeb yap ical irpoTepov, et'Sw?, oti fie r)irdTr)cra<; Kal 7rpovBa)Ka<;, vvv Be ttoWw irXeov, ore Kal rd eyxXrifiaTa diroBvaaadai eVe^etpT/cra?, tovto fiavOdvco /cal 10 <rvvLT)fii /ca\a><;, 01 t£>v Ka/c&v /Me tfyayes. 1 27. E* yap Bid tovto travrbv vtre^r]yaye<i tj)? TOiavTrj? XeiTOvpylas, <rvveiBob<; ovk dpKovadv gov ttjv yjrv^r/v ' irpbi tov tov Trpdyfj,aT0<; oy/cov, efte irpoTepov e^eXeardai e^pi)v, ical el TroWrjv 777309 tovto e-^wv ttjv etridvfiiav eTvy^avov, fir) 15 oti Kal Trdcrav ttjv vrrep tovtwv eTreTpeifra aoi fSovXrfv. 128. Nw Be to o-avTOV fibvov IBwv to rffieTepov irapeZBes' eWe fiev ovv wapelBes, ical dyairrjTov av y)V av Be ical 07r&>9 ev^etpcoToi yevcofieOa toi? /3ov\ofievoi<; \af3eiv eirefiov-

2 «ra avrtjv e| a-jrpoffcl-ias Xv/irjr. y' vulg || 5 ov 7rai£w] <nrov6afav cuxy' vulg waL^uiv \e7e1s r. rp. ov awovSafav ei yap ov watfav kt\. h [| 9 vvv TroXXy cfxyz || 10 airokvo'aadat a airoXovaaadai oliv atreKbvffaadai henr || 13 oti (Tupciocs vulg || 16 ttjk virep tovtiov «irpo|os awovSriv xz rrp> inrep rovrov vpa£ai tnrovoijv y* \\ 17 ecdus fy*

t. <r<pp. Kal e&Tp.] 'in good condition and well-nourished' (Stephens).
3. ovtws ayair. . . . ^eoc] ' God, who loved it so well that He gave
Himself: us = ware. 4. iraifaiK...oi) Tralfav] ' in jest'
,,.' in earnest.' Ralfav is similarly contrasted with aXiiffeviav ii 4 sub Jin.
7. airoKpovo-. tt)k aOviL.} ' to dispel my despondency.'
9. vvv te] Si merely marks the main sentence: cp. its use in apodosis.
ib. tA iyK. itroSvff. ] ' to refute

the charges': cp. iii 18 airoSita$ai to. irap' iicelvw iykMipara. There is some authority for the readings avokvo-aoQai and airo\6eo~6ai in these passages respectively : they are
equally possible (Field on Homm. in Malt. 449 E and Index II s.v. avobl/eadat) : but airodvo-ao-6at. and diroSveadai have better MS support.
12. \etrovpylas] Cp. i 4 Sifijs kt\. (note).
15. /itjoVi]' not to mention that': cp. i 5.
18. iyaniyriv av rjv] '/should have been content.'

38

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. iv

Xevcra<;. 1 29. OvBe yap eh eicelvo icaTa<pvyeiv e^ot? dv, oti r) t&v iroXX&v Bo^a rjiraTTjae ere, ical fieydXa Tivd ical Bavfiaara trepl rjfiiov virotneveiv eireiaev ovre yap tcov davfia^ofiivcov ical iirio~r)fia>v qp.elf, ovre, el ical tovto ovtwi

5 ")(pv ervyxave, ttjv twv iroXXtov B6£av tt)? aXr)6eia<; irpoTi/irjcrai e%pf)v. 130. Et fiev yap pvqBeiroTe aoi ireipav T779 rjnerepas eBofiev crvvovcrias, eBoicei ti? elvai aoi irpo<pao~i<; evXoyos, dtro tij? tcov iroXXcbv <pr)fiT]<; cpepovri ttjv yfrfjcpov el Be oiBel<; ovras to, r)p.erepa olBev, dXXd ical tcov
10 yeyepvrjKOTtov ical 6pe-^rap.evcov avT&v ttjv r)/j,erepav /miXXov eiritTTacrai yfrw)(r)v, ti? outo>? earai aoi Xoyos iriOavbs, a>? Bvvrjdijvai ireicrai tovs d/covovTas oti ov^ ckwv r)p,a<; et? tovtov coaa<; tov kivBvvov ; 131* 'AWa yap ravra a<f>eiaOco vvV ovBe yap virep tovtcov ere dvayicd%op.ev icp'iveerOai.
15 ti irpb<; Toi/9 eyicaXovvTa<; diro\oy7]cr6p.eda, Xeye. 1 32. 'AW' oiiBe avrbf irporepov, ecprjv, eir eicelva tropevcro/juii, ea>? civ BiaXvo-co/xai ret 77-po? <xe, kcLv fivpidtcis avro? ij/ta? tcov eytcXr^ixaTcov i0eXr/<; diroXveiv. 133. 2u fiev yap e<pr)<} rrjv dyvoiav rjfitv (pepeiv o-vyyvcopvr\v, ical rtrdcrr)<; av r)p.a<;

20 dcpeivai icavqyopia<;, el fitjBev tcov ercov elSores elrd ere ell ra irapovTa rjyayo/jiev eireiBr) Be ovk dyvoovvTa<; irpoBovvai, dXX a/cpt/Sw? eTricrrafievov; to, era, Bid tovto iracrav rjfjilv irpocpacriv evXoyov ical aTroXoyiav dvyprjcrdai Biicaiav. 134 'Eyo> Be irdv tovvovt'iov (f>rjfi[. Bid t'i; oti
25 Ta ToiavTa iroXXr)<; SeiTat Trj<s i^eTacreox;, ical tov fieXXovTa irapaBwaew tov ets lepcocrvvrjv eiriTr)Beiov ov Bet Tr) tcov

7 eSuKancv b vulg || 10 avrtav] ij^of ( || 17 $ia\vownc$a.3. || 24 Sucoioc fiz henr |j (pfj/u* Sum ra roiavra z vulg

3. iirowTeietv'] 'to expect': cp. iii 1 Oavfmari riva ko.1 /ieyd\a... iwoTTeOeiv. In the ordinary sense, 'to suspect,' the verb occurs below nlvtvvov inroirTevaai, ii. 6 tva pi\ tis iiroTTeio-Q kt\.
8. tpipovn t. \j/.] 'giving your verdict': cp. iii 14 ei...^p«s riff yijtpov.

9. twv ycyevv.^ with /mWov: ' better than your parents?
13. <3<ras] for laxras (ibdiu). 10. ?ais av 5iaXi)<r.] 'till I have come to terms with you.' 19. ipipeui iruyyi/.] 'forms an excuse': lit. 'brings pardon.' 11. iweiSii Si] sc. ?^s from the preceding clause.

II. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

39

ttoW&v apKeiadai <f>rjp.rj f^ovov, a\\<i fier e'/cetVj;? Kal avrbv fiaKurra ttclvtcov Kal irpb irdvrmv e^t)raKevai to eiceivov. 1 35- Kat yap 6 fiaicdpios IlauXo? elirmv, Aet Se avrbv teal p,aprvpiav eyeiv Ka\r)v drrb rwv e%wQev, ovk dvaipei rr/v aicpiftf) ical /3e/3acravicrfxevT]v epevvav, ovc7 ft>? 5 Trpor)ryovfJ.evov reKfirjpiov tovto Tudrjcn Trj<{ rwv roiovrcov 8o/cifiacria<}. icai yap iro\ka irporepov ota\e;j£#ei9, vcrrepov tovto irpoaeQr\Ke, Sei/cviis, a><? ovk avrw p.6vov apxelcrOat Set 7rpo? Ta? TOiavra<; a/peo-et?, dXXd fierd rcav aWwv ical avTO Trapa\ap,f3aveiv XPV- crv/iftatvei yap rroWaKis rr)v 10 twv iroWwv yfrevBeadai, <pr)p,r)v ttjs Be a/cpt/SoC? e£erdcrea><; r)yr)crap,ev'r\<i, ovSeva iic ravTT]<; kivBvvov ecrrtv viroirrevcrat. Xoittov. 136. Ata tovto fierd rd aXka \rd irapd r&v eljeadev] avrb ridrjcriv. oil yap dirKw<; ecpr/ae, Aet 8e avrbv IxaprvpLav eyeiv ica\r}v, dWa to ical irapeve(3a\e, hrfK&aai 15 /3ov\6fievo<;, on rrpb rfj<; t&v ejjooOev (pr)fj,rj<; 7rpos dtcptfteiav avTov Biepevvr/cracrOai Set. 137- E7rei. ovv ical avTO<; rjSeiv rd era t&v yevevv7]Korcov fiaWov, ft)? ical avro<; mp,oXoyrjcras, Bid tovto St/eato? dv eli)v trdai]^ d<peicr6ai atria?. 138. At' aiiro fiev ovv tovto, (prjaiv, ovk dv direepvyes, el ri<s 20

8 ovk av avrw vulg || fiovoj hiy || 11 ^rjfirjv] do£av fhixz || 13 \oiirov] + iroTe y || J 4 avro] avrio pr avrov x vulg || 15 to Kai\ + irapa twv (£u()ev yz vulg || i6irposT-n--(pvPV y II r7 8«] XPV vz II '9 atpuoSai hiyz a^ioraadai. x || 20 ovk av e(pvyes vulg

1. jLter' iKiivy\i\ i.e. tt)S tfr-qfnjs. 2. to. inelvov] 'his manner of life.' 3. Set 8e avrbv kt\.~\ i Tim. iii 7, on which passage Dean Bernard remarks (Pitt Press Edition) that 0! ?£<<> 'is St Paul's regular description for those who are not Christians and so oIkcToi T7js irlareus. ' See also on tous Q(o$ev i 4. WH. omit avrbv. 5. axpiprj kt\.~\ ' painstaking and accurate investigation.' 6. irpoiryoinevov"\ 'chief,' ' principaV 12. Ik TaiirT/s] sc. t?s twv iroXXwx

tp-iffirjs. 13. [t& irapa t. £{.]] These
words I enclose in brackets, as a gloss on airb. Hughes suggests that tl-wQev should be t<ru>9ev : ' after the proofs of inward fitness.'
15. iXKa to Kal x.] 'but he inserted the word "also " ' : i.e. in the phrase Set Se avrbv Kal /laprvplav j=xeiv Ka\fy kt\.
16. robs dxpi/S.] i.e. &KpiftQs: cp. Trpbs aX'/jSeiav = dXTjSuj, ii 5.
19. Sikuios ktX.] '/ should deserve to be acquitted of all blame. '

40

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. iv

tre ypd<f>ecr0ai rjdeXev. r) ov (lefivrjaai ical Trap' r)fiwv dicovo~a<; ·KoWa.Ki';, ical Bid rcbv epycov avrdov 8iBa%6el<;, to 7-779 yfrv)(f)<i dyevves rrj<} e/A7j?; oil Bid tovto ell fiticpo·<^v)(iav r)p.a<; StereXei? ctkcotttcov del, on ical rals tvj(ov-

5 crais (ppovTim KaraimrTop.ev evKoXto<; ; 139. Mefiwrjp.ai /jL6i> ical ravra iroXXaicK, e<f)T)v, dicovcras -rrapa o~ov Ta prifiara, ical ovk av dpvrjOeirjv. eya> Si ere ei irore eaKCOirrov, irai^eov, ovk dXrjdevwv, tovto eiroiovii. V. dXX' ofico<> ovBep virep tovtcov <f>iXoveiKcb vvv d^iw Be ical avrbv
10 rr)V %err)v fjbm irapaeryelv evyvwfioavvrjv, OTav deXtjcrco two? eTrifivrjcrdfjvai toiv croi TrpoerovTeov dyadwv. 140. K.av ydp i'jri^eiprjo'r]'; rj/Aas direXey^ai yjrevBo/jiivovs, ov <f>eicrofi,eOa, dXX' diroBei^o/jiev /xerpid^ovTa ae p,dXXov r) irpo<; dXrjdeiav Tavra <f)6eyy6fievov, eTepo) p,ev ovSevl, tok Be XoyoK tois
1 5 ctois ical Tal<> irpa^ecri pdpTvai Ke^prjfievoi 7T/30? ttjv twv Xeyofiivcov dXrjOeiav. 141. Tlpfirrov Be ere eicelvo epiadai fiovkopai' oicrda irocrrj Trj<; dydirr]^ r) 8vvafii<> ; 6 p,ev yap XptcTTo? ra TepdcrTia iravTa dcfyels, airep efieXXev virb tu>v dirocrToXcov TeXelaOai' 'Ei> tovtw, <fyi)o~l, yvmcrovTai oi
20 dv9pa>TT0C otl ifioL io~Te fiadrjTal, eav cbyairaTe aXXijXov?. o Be HavXos ·trXrjpwp.a tov vo/j-ov (j>r}crlv avTTjv

elvai, ical TavT7)$ dirovo-r)<; ovBev tuiv ^apoo-fiaTtov 8<peXo<;. 142. Tovto Btj to e^aipeTov dyaObv, to yva>picrp,a t5>v tov Xjota"Toy fia0r)T&v, to t&v papier/j,aTO)v dvooTepco KeLfievov,

2 Ktu iroWaKts vulg || 9 auro»] aeavrov y vulg || 15 xPwfLt'">1 hfy II 18 Sia tu>v airoffToXuv fx || 21 tov vo/iov] + km irpo<pTp-ai> cfhixyz || 22 ouSei-] + eivai yz vulg

3. els /UKpoif/.'] 'on the score of pusillanimity.'
4. toTs tvx- <pP-] ' ordinary cares': cp. i 4 ttjv rvxovaav (note).
V., VI. The efficacy of Christian charity is illustrated by an anecdote, recounted by Chrysostom of Basil.
9. oi)to»] i.e. ainhv at: 'you, for your part.'
13. nerpi&favTa'] ' out ofmodesty' : cp. ii 6 fierptdfeiv fiaWov tj AXqBcOav

j3ov\6/icroi>, vi 7 01) neTpi&fav ravra Xiyw. also Homm. in Malt. 314 B SeSotKihs fi^i iierpiafav avavttio-rj.
19. (v roirif] Jn xiii 35 (iv to6T(fi yvCxsovrai. vAvres otl 4/iol /iadijral io-re, iav aya-n-qv txVTe t* aWijKms WH.).
21. rrXTjp. t. v.] Rom. xiii 10. 22. Tavrrp airoforis ktX.] a paraphrase of 1 Cor. xiii 3.

II. v]

DE SACERDOTIO

41

eiBov yevvalws ev rfj cry TrecpvTevfiivov "^v^fj, Kal ttoXXoj fipvov tS> Kapirw. 143. "On /xev ttoXXt) pot,, cpr/ai, tov "7rpar/fiaro<; r) cppovrls, Kal p,eyl,o-Tr)v iroiovfiat, ttjv cnrovBrjv inrep ravT7)<; it}? evToXr)<;, ical avTos o/ioXoyoo' on Be oiiBe el; rjfiicreias avTrjv Bir)vvaap,ev, ical avTtx; dv fioi fiapTV- 5 pijcrais, el to irp6<; %dpiv Xeyeiv d<pel<; rtfirjaai TaXr/des /3ov\r)dec7]<;. VI. 144. Ovkovv iirl Toils eXeyxovs rpiyfrop,ai, e<f)i)w ical oirep rjTreiXrjcra, iroirjcra) vvv, p,eTpid^eiv p,a.XXov fj dXrjdevetv ftovXofievov diroBet^as. ep5> Be irpayp.a dprt <7u/i/3e/3j7«o?, Xva p,r\ rt? inroirrevcrri ra iraXaid fie 10 Bir)yovp.evov, rS TrXrjdei tov yjpovov TaXr/des eiriaKid^eiv eTri^eipelv, t?)? X-rjOr/s ovk d<pteicrri<; eiriaKrjyfrat rot? "irpos Xdpiv Xeyop,evoi<; Trap' r)p.&v. 145. "Ore yap twv eiri.Tr)Seicov Tt? t&v r)p,eTepcov, eV eyicXijpacriv vfipecos ical dirovot,a<> o-vico<f)avTT)8el<;, irepl t&v io-^drcov eKivBvveve, 15 T0T6 ovTe iyKaXovvTOS crot, twos, ovre eiceivov tov kivBvveveiv p.eXXovTO<; Berj6evTo<;, et? fiecrovs cravTov eppiyfras Tou? kivBvvovs. 146. Kal to p.ev epyov tovto r)v. Xva Be <re Kal diro t&v prjp.dTQ)v iXey^co/xev irreiBr) yap ttjv irpoOvpiav Tavrrjv 01 fiev ovk direSe^ovTo, ol Be iirrjvovv 20 Kal i0avp.a£ov' Kal ti irdOoi ; irpo<; tow eyKaXovvTas ecpr/f ere/aw? yap ovk olBa cpiXelv, dXX' rj p.eTa tov Kal Tr/v tyv)(r)v eKBiBovat ttjv efiavTOv, rjviKa dv Tiva t&v eiriTriBelcov KivSvvevovTa Biacr&crai Bey 147. pr\p,acri p,ev

5 Ha.prvpi)<Teis vulg || 12 ttjs \t)0i;s] tt\i a\r)6cias cfmx vulg || 15 etcwdvvevae vulg || 19 e\ey£uifi.ei>] + k<u avrwv ran eipmjficvuv <roi fivri/iovevauiiiep (-o-o/tep) cehkntz henr vulg || om yap vulg

4. oiSi il- T)iutT.~\ ' have not completed it by half : i.e. are still far short of perfection in it.
VI. 10. iW /i-// ns] Chrys. forgets dramatic propriety, and speaks as one writing for the public, not conversing privately with his friend.
1 2. ttjs \J1Or1s] 'forgetfulness not a/lowing anyone to find fault with my words ofpraise.' If Chrys. had selected an example from a much

earlier time, it might have been said that he was counting on the shortness of men's memories. Hence he takes a recent instance. For tt/jos X^P'" CP- BiSacrKaXtat irpos r)Soirffv iii 9.
21. Kal rl iraBta;] Cp. iv 1 rl <roi wdffa; vi 7 dWii tL t&Ou ;
12. ^Wpws...d\\' 17 kt\.~\ 'unless accompanied by a readiness to give »/' etc.

42

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. vi

eripois, Biavoia Se rfj avrfj, ra tov ~Kpiarov (pdeyyofievo? a 7T/90? tov? fia8rjTa<; eXeye, tjj? TeXeia? dydtrrj? tov? opovf Ttdei?. Mei£bi/a yap ravTTjt dydtvrjv ovhel? e^et, <f>r)crlv, r) Iva Tt? ttjv yfrvxrjv avrov dfj inrep tcov <f>l\a>v aiiTov. el

5 toLvvv fiel&va TavTr)? ovk ecniv evpelv, iwl to TeXo? avrrjs e<p6acra?' Kal oV tov eirpa^a? Kal oY wv 6t7ra? t?7? Kopv(prj? eirefir}? avT-r)?. 148. Aid tovto ere trpovhaoKafiev, hid tovto tov hoXov eppdijrafiev eicelvov. apd ere Trel6op.ev, otc ovtb eic /caicovola<;, oxne els Kivhvvov e/i^aXelv ftovXofievoi,
10 a\\a yjpr)Gipuov ecrecrOai elSoTes, el? to crTahiov ecXKOfiev tovto; 149- E'Ta apxelv oiei, eprjcrl, irpo? Tr/v t&v 7r\i)crlov Siopdeoeriv ttjv tyj? dydirr)? 8vvap,iv ; 150. MaXto-ra [lev iroXv p,epo?, e<f>rjv, Trpo? tovto crvfifiaXecrBai hvvaiT dv. el he ftovXei Kal Trj? cjipovrjcreeo? ijfid? Trj? err]? hei-

15 yfiaTa e^eveyKelv, Kal eVt Tavrrjv /3a8iovp,e0a, Kal Sei^op,ev crvveTOv ovTa fidXXov r) cpiXoaTopyov. 1 5 1. 'E7rt tovtw epvdpidera? eKeivo? Kal <f}Oivi%del?, Ta fiev rjfieTepd, <f>ijcn, irapeicrdm vvv ovSe yap irapa ttjv dp^ijv ere tov inrep tovtwv Xoyov dirriTOW. el Se ti irpo? tov? egaffev SiKaiov
20 e%et? elireiv, r)8eco? av tow inrep tovtwv aKovoifii Xoyov;. Bio tt)v crKiafia^iav tuvtijv a<fiel? elire, tl irpo? tov? Xonroii? diroXoy'qcrop.eda, Kal tov? TeTifirjKOTa?, Kal tov? inrep eKeiveov d>? vfipicrfievcov dXyovvTa? ; VII. 152. K.al

6 eiires vulg || 13 <TUjU|Sa\Xe<7-0ai z vulg |] 1 6 «ri tovtois yz vulg || 18 irapa ttjv apxwl °m irapa y || 23 eis eneimvs vulg

3. /teifoxa] Jn xv 13 (WH. omit yap and ij).
6. ttpvaaas] 'you have come.' The idea of anticipation had already disappeared from this verb in the N.T. : cp. also Mason Five Orations Index III s.v.
10. araSiov] ' arena ' : lit. ' race course.'
13. -TroXi fUpos kt\.] 'could contribute largely to this end.' _ 18. irapa rty ipx^"] ' at the out·>···'· cp. ii 7 ra nip irapa. tt\v ipxh" \ey6/ioe.

21. ovcia/iaxW] ('fight with a shadow '), i.e. ' mock-fight.'
VII. Basil had said that Chrys., by his withdrawal, cast a slur upon those who recommended him for consecration. Chrys. replies that, properly considered, his action deserves praise, not blame, from such persons. For if he had yielded to their wishes, his weak points would speedily have been found out, to the discomfiture of all who had supported him.

II. vn]

DE SACERDOTIO

43

avrds \onrov, e(f>r)v, Trpos tovto eirei,yop,at. eireiBrj yap 6 7r/jos <re fiot 8ir]Vvo-Tai \6yos, ev/c6\a><; Kal eirl tovto Tpeifrofiai tj;? aTto\oyla<i to fiepos. Tt? ovv 77 tovtwv

KdTTjyopia, Kal Tiva to iy/cXr/paTa. ; B A2. 'TfipicrOai, <f>acnv v<p' r)p.wv Kal Beivd irerrovOevai, oti Trjv Tt,p,rjv, fjv $ Ttfifjaai rjdeXrjcrav, ovk eBe^dpteda. ID. 153- 'E7&) Be ·KpSiTOv fiev i/cetvo <pr)fii, oti ovBeva \6yov iroteladat Bel

tj?? els avdpoiTrov; v/3peo)?, OTav Bia. tyjs eKelvccv Ttyu^? avayiea£(Ofieda irpoo-icpoveiv Oew. ovBe yap rot? ayavaictovo~iv avTolt to Bvo~%epaiveiv eirl tovtocs aKivBwov, dWa 10

Kal TroWr/v e%6i tt)V ty)p,iav. Set yap olftai tov? dvaiceifievovs dew, Kal trpos avTov ftXiirovTa1} p,ovov, oinm BiaKeiadai ev\aj3oi><;, to? firjBe vftpiv to toiovto r)yeio~dai, Kal el p.vpidKif r)Tip,a>p,evoi. Tvyxavoiev. 1 54. "Oti Be ovBe p^i'Xpi ivvotas TTo\p.r]Tat, ti toiovtov ifiol, BfjXov eKeWev. 15 el p.ev yap dirovoiq Kal <f>c\oSo^la, a>? 7roXXaKt? e<pr]<} Twa? 8ta/3dWeiv, eirl tovto fjXdov iya), yjr7]<f>l,aao'6ai tois KaTij-

yopois, TOiv to, fieyiaTa r/BiKrjKOTtov av elyv, dvBp&v KaTa(ppovrjo-as 6avfiao-T&>v Kal fieydXwv, Kal irpbs tovtois

evepyeT&v. el yap to tou? p.T)Bev rjBiKTjKOTas dBiKelv, 20

10 o.ku>8woi>] + <pan)V av y'z vulg || 11 ex*"' z vulg l| 13 vfipiv to Trpay/M fxyz || 15 e/ioi] + 1\ erepov vulg, et codd omnes praeter cu || 20 om fir)Sev a

2. koI 4irl tovto... Tb fitpos] * to this portion also.'
5. -riv] a cognate accusative: cp. on i 4 (tpvyeiv rty <pvyrjv).
11. avaKeiiiivovs] 'consecrated': avdKci/iai is used as the passive of avarldTiiu (whence avaBriim, ' offering ').
14. oi8i M^X/" iyy-] 'not even in thought': cp. ovk £o*tt/ fi^xP1 to&tov ii 1 (note).
17. ifrniQWaadai t. <c.] If these words are genuine (and they are found in all MSS known to me), they serve to explain toCto. 'I came (was brought) to this, viz. to vote for (side with) my accusers.' It has been suggested that they are an interpolation, and that the true

explanation of tovto is rb SiafivyeTv ttjv Upuxrivriv (to be supplied from the context): cp. iv 2 roils pir e\opjvovs eUbs virb dbfcrjs if/evdovs airaTyBivras 4rl tovto (\8eiv,\.e. ewl rb i\4a$ai 4\0eiv. On the other hand yj/ti<j>laaa6ai is not a very likely word for an interpolator to use : so I make no change.
i8. twv Ta 11. tjS.'] 1 1 should be one of the greatest offenders. '
20. toi>s i^iSh ijS.] If with one Ms we omit firj5ti>, the climax in rods tiSik. . . . roiis ti/i. irpoe\. a<$> iavrGiv is more strongly marked: but we should then have expected Kal tous ^5. 'even those who have wronged us.'

44

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[II. vn

KoXdcreay; d^tov rovs Tip.rjaai TrpoeXo/j-evov; a<$> eavT&v (oi>8e yap tovto eftoi tii av eliretv, oti, ev iraOovTes rj fiiKpbv r) p,eya Trap e'/xov, t&iv evepyecri&v i/celvrnv e^eTicrav ra<; a/j,oifia<;), 7ro<rrj<; ovk av etr/ n/j,cop[a<; d£tov, rol<; 5 ivavTiots a/JuelftecrOat, ; 155- Et Se tovto p,ev o&Be et? vovv ifiaXofiedd ttot, fied^ ere/oct? Se irpoaipeare<0<; to /3api> <f>opTiov i%eickivap,ev, ti 7rapevTe<; crvyyivmcrKetv, el ye diroSe^eaOai p,r) j3ovXoivto, iyKaXovcriv oti tt)<; eavT&v i<peicrd/j,eOa ·^·v^r)^ ; 1 56. 'Ey<b yap toctovtov divkcryov
10 ei? toik; dvhpas vftpicrai exetvovi, oti ical TeTifiij/cevai avToiit fyaitp) av tt} rrapaiTrjaei. ical p,r) Qavp,dcrr)<i, el irapdSo^ov to Xeyofievov Ta%elav yap ical tovtov tt)v Xvcriv errd^ofiev. 1 57- Tore p.ev yap, el ical fit) TrdvTes, dXX' 0I9 to Ka/ca)<i dyopevecv rjSv, TroXXa av el%ov ical
15 viroTTTevcrai, ical eliretv irepi T6 tov %eipoToi>i)9evTo<; ifiov, Trepi tb to>v eXo/ievtov--olov, oti, irpos irXovrov ftXeTrovaiv, otl Xa/nrpoTTjTa yevov; 6avp,a^ovcriv, oti icoXaicevdevTe<{ i(fV r)p,Siv el's tovto ^/xa? Traprjyayov el Se ical oti xpij/j,acrt, nreicrdevTes, ovk e)(a> Xeyeiv, el ti<; ical tovto inro7rTevo~o)p

1 a<p' eauTUx] + 7TUs rifmv XPV vu'g II 4 tootjs] + ovk y vulg || 16 oiov on re vulg || 19 VTOTTTevwv vulg

I. rods t. irpocX.] accus. with a/xcifiecrdai. The order of the words is Tr6o"qs...d^tov, [rb] rots tvavrlots dfj-clp. tous rip. irpoeX. cup. i. There seems to be no MS authority for the words ttiSs Tt/iav xj>V> added in the vulgate text after dip' iavrdv. Note the contrast between no\d<rews and Tipjaplas. KoXaais = ' punishment ' as correction, to check the further growth of the evil : ri/xwpio = ' punishment' as retribution for a past offence: see Hort-Mayor, Index to Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii (s.v. rifiwola). Cp. iii 17 below Kb\afftv altbviov toO fdaovs dlSuai ri)v Tip.aplav (note).
7. tL trap. iru77. kt\.] ' why do they refuse (lit. ' omit ') to pardon

me, supposing that they cannot approve: and accuse me because I am anxious to spare their souls ? ' Cp. iii. 10 (of God) ttjs ^p.eWpas tpubbp-eras rpvxys.
13. \vciy] ' explanation.' 15. xetPOTOV-] 'ordained' : cp. i 3 xlPOTOV'^aelv (note). 16. ir\ovTov...y4vovs] ForChrysostom's wealth and station see i 1. 18. irap-qyayov] 'promoted' : iopAyeiv is found in this sense at iii 16, iv 2 (ter). id. el Si ko.1 Srt kt\.] i.e. el Se /cat tfrfjfret tis Stl xP- Tretad. etKovro. 1 9. viroirTevatav iji>] (' was about to suspect' i.e.) 'would have suspeeled.'

II. vil]

DE SACERDOTIO

45

rjv. 158. Kat* 6 [lev Xpirrros dXtet? ical cricijvcyiroiovs ical reXavas hrl ravTqv eicdXecre ttjv apxrfv ovtoi Se tovs [iev d.7ro tt?s epyacrias t??? Kadr][iepivr}s rpe<po[ievovs Siatrrvovcriv, el he tis Xoycov ayfrairo tcov e%a>8ev, ical dpywv rpecpoiro, tovtov diroSi')(pvTai ical 6av/j,d£ovcri. rC yap 5 Sijirore roil? fiev [ivpiovs dvaaypfievovs ISpoaras els rds Trjs eicicXr)o-La<; ^peias irapelSov tov Se ovSeirore toiovtwv yevadfievov irovcov, irdcrav Se rr/v tfXiiclav ev Tjj rSiv e%a>6ev Xoycov fiaraioTroviq KaravaXcoaavTa, efjai<f>vr)$ els Tavrijv e'Ckicvcrav ttjv rcfiqv ; 159. Tavra ical irXeiova 10 tovtcov Xiyeiv etyov av, Se^a/ievcov rjp.cov ttjv dp%t)v, aU' ov vvv. iracra yap avrois KaKrjyopias etc/ceicoirTat, irpo<f)acri<}' icai ovre ep.01 KoXaicetav, ovre /iiodapviav exelvois ejfovaiv eyicaXelv, irXrjv ei rives dirXGis fuiivecrdai fiovXoivto. 160. II a>5 yap o icoXaicevcov jcal xprffiara dvaXi- 15 ctkwv iva Tvyr) rijs rififjs, rjvi/ca eSei Tv%elv, erepois av dcprjicev avrrp ; o/ioiov yap av elr) tovto, Sairep av ei tis ttoXXovs irepl ttjv yrjv avaaj^ofievos trovovs, "va jUplOrjTai, [lev ai/Tft) to Xr/lov troXXm t&) Kapirq>, olvco Se virepfiiXvtfocriv al Xrjvol, p,erd tovs [ivpiovs ISp&ras ical ttjv troXXrjv 20 t5)v xprjfidrcov Sawdvrjv, tjviic av tcaXafiaadai ical rpvydv

11 ei^oc Xe7«c avade%a.p*vtiiv bfyz franc henr oliv || 12 eKKOTTtrat cz vulg || 14 nejxipeadai af || 20 fivpiovs] iroXXous cfyz

1. dXicjs] e.g. Peter, Andrew, James, John: Matt, iv 18--11.
ib. <TKr)voirmois] e.g. Paul: Acts xviii 3.
2. TcXiicas] e.g. Levi (Matthew): Lk. v 27.
3. airb tt)s ipy. t. k.] Yet the Church at Antioch was wealthy : Puech p. 234.
4. \6yiav tCiv ?£.] 'secular [profane) learning.' Chrys. himself was trained by the pagan Libanius : cp. i 1 8idatTKd\ovs (note). For tQv (!-(a8ei> cp. i 4 roiis puffer (note).
ib. apywv rpdipoiTo] ' were to live in idleness.'
9. fiaTaioTrovlo] This is con-

trasted with the irivot, the real and fruitful labours of the hard-working men who (it is alleged) ought to have been chosen.
13. /u<r6apvlav'\ 'venality? ' corruption.'
16. Ip/tica ISet t.] 'when he was sure to obtain it.'
18. ppiBrjTai] from flpideiv (transitive) : cp. on iinfiplOiav i 1.
19. i>7rep/3X.] ' overfloia' : the verb is also found in Clement of Alexandria.
21. koK. (coi rp.] ' to gather corn and pluck grapes' : koX. refers back to Xiji'w', rp. to \rjvot.

46

CHRYSOSTOMUS DE SACERDOTIO [II. VII

Set), TqviKavra eTepois rrj<{ rdov icapirmv itccrrairj qbopd?. 161. Op&<;, on Tore p.ev el ical troppto t^? d\r)0eias r/v to. Xeyopeva, aXX op,a><; elypv Trp6<f>acriv ol j3ov\6[ievoi BiafidWeiv avrovi, a><? ovk opQr) Kplaei Xoytap,dSv Trjv aipe5 aiv Treiroirjfievovs ; r)p.ei<; Be avroi? vvv ovBe j(avai, ovBe a7r\<»? Bidpai to crro/ia o~vve%a>pr)o~ap£v. ical rd puev irapd rr)v apyr)v \eyop.eva ToiavTa dv f/v, ical tovtcov irke'iova. 162. Mera Be to ttj<; Biaicovla<; atyao~6ai ovk dv rjpicecrafxev KaG" e/cdarrjv rjjiepav Tot? eyKaXovcriv diro\oyov[ievoi, el Kal 10 irdvra rjfiiv avafiapTijTm? etrpdrTero, p,r) on Kal 7roXXa Biapaprdvetv viro Te Trjs direipia? ical Trjs rfK.iicia<; rjvayKacr6r)fiev av vvv Be ical ravrr]<; avrov<; Trjs KaTrjyopias aTnrjWd^afiev, Tore Be p.vpioif dv avrovs irepiefidWofiev ovelBeai. 163. Ti ydp ovk dv elirov ; iraialv dvor)TOi<s 15 irpdypura ovrto davfiacnd ical p,eyd\a eirirpei^av eKvfujvavro tov deov to iroifiviov iralyvia ical yeX<»? yeyove Ta Xpio-Tiavdov. dXXd vvv irdcra dvop,ia ip,(ppd^ei to crrofia avTJjs' el ydp ical Bid <re Tavra \eyoiev, dWd Ta^ea)? avToiis BiBd^eiv Bid twv epyatv, on ov %pr) Trjv 20 o-vveaiv rfkiKiq icpiveiv, ovBe tov irpeajUvtijv diro Trji 7roXta? BoKip,d£eiv, ovBe tov veov irdvT<o<; direlpyeiv tt}<; ToiavT7}<; BiaKOvla<;, dWd tov veotpvrov, ttoXii Be dp,<poTepcov to p,eo~ov.

8 ijpKtaav c || 11 Siapapreiv c vulg || 12 Kanyyopias yz xaKovpyias i || 13 Ttpief}a\o/iev yz vulg Tepief3a\oi> c || 14 t« yap ovk av aire vulg

5. oiSi x°-vma Cp. afia T<f x""ai 13.
6. Siapai to <rr6/ia] 'to open his lips ' : with negative, ' not to utter a sound,' ne hiscere quidem.
id. irapa rty apx/l"] The same phrase occurred in ii 6 (note).
10. fri] brrt...8ia/i.'] ' not to speak
of my being forced to offend': i.e. much less if I offended though unavoidably.

14. elirov] sc. the party hostile to Chrysostom.
16. iraiyvia koX 7.] 'a jest and laughing-stock.'
17. 7rS<ra avopUa] Ps. cvii 42. 20. r)\iK. np.~\ Wisd. iv 8, 9, 1 Tim. iv 12 (p:r]dels <rou rip vebrrp-os KaratppovelTio).
22. rbv ve6<p.~\ 1 Tim. iii 6. 23. to p.t<sov\ 'the difference': see on ii 2 (Sari irp6s kt\.).

Aoros r.

TaSe evecrnv iv tw y Xoyw.

I.
II. III.
IV.
V. VI. VII.
VIII.
IX. X.

On 01 virovo-qo-avTts 8t* diro'voiav TraprfrijcrOai tJ/aSs, Tijv a.vT<jiv vir6\rf\f/iv t/3\a\f/av.
Oti o£8e 8ia KevoSo^iav itpvyoptv. Oti «i 8d|ijs iirt8vfi.ovii.lv, (Xio-Oai paXkov to Tcpaypa
*XPVVOti <j>piKTov if UpuKrwi/, Kai iro\v Til's TraAaias AaTpetas
17 Kaivr; (jipLKioSfo-repa. Oti TroW?) tujv UpeW 77 f£ov<ria Kai Tiprj. 'Oti t<3v n-apd tow ^eov p.eyio~Tti>v So>pe<3v euri Siaxovoi. 'Oti Kai IlaSXos 7repi8t^s ijv, irpos to p-eytOos Trjs
·WW8 opcov. 'Oti 7toAA<£ tis dpapTavstv irpoayeTai, eis to picrov i\6uiv,
aV p/i) 0-<p68pa ycwatos iy. 'Oti K«yo8ofia Kai tois ravrrfs d\to"K£rai Seti/ais. 'Oti oi\ if itpwrvvrf rovrtav airia, aAV 17 qp.tTtpa pa.Ovp.ia.

XI. Oti ri/j' iiciOvplav rrj'i <pi\ap\ias eK/3tf3\rjo-6ai Sei T77S tov Itpttas i/^X1?5-

I. 164. T^? /iev ovv u/Speai? eveicev T77? et? toi)? Terifirf-

vi eKrix ai Sioicoi'toi vulg || viii iroXXam o/t. vulg || xi Sei] + O7ro vulg || 1 om eveKcv vulg

I. Those who accuse Chrysostom of arrogance because he rejected the proffered honour shew by so doing that they themselves fail to appredate that honour at its true value: otherwise they would have seen that

no one could possibly reject it unless for the strongest of reasons, viz. a feeling ofpersonal unworthiness.
1 . ttjs (i/Sp. tmxr\ ' as for the (alleged) insolence.'

48

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. I

Kora?, Kal on avrow ov Karaiaj^vvai ftovXofievoi Tavrrjv efyvyofiev rrjv Tifirjv, ravra av tyoifiev Xeyeiv, avep elprjicafiev on Be ovBe v-rro dirovoias twos <pvo~r)devTe<;, Kal tovto vvv els Bvvafiiv tt)v ejirjv Treipdo-Ofiai o-oi TTotijaac 5 <f>avepov. 165. Et fikv yap o-TpaTryyias r)/j,iv rj fiao-iXeias aipeats trpovKeno, elra TavTrjv etyov tt)v yvwfirjv, el/corax; av Tt? tovto vireXafJew rj tots p,ev dtrovolas ovBels, avoid? Be irdvTes av rjfids iiKpivav. lep(oo~vvrj<; Be irpoKeifievrjs, rj 1 ToaovTOv dvcoTepw ftao-iXelas eo-TrjKev oaov irvevfiaTos ical 10 aapxos to fieo~ov, ToX/Mrjaei tis r/fias vTrepoyfrias ypajfyeaQai; 166. Kal irws ovk cltottov, tovs fiev to, p.ucpd BiaTTTVovTa<}, a><? trapatraiovTas aiTidadaf rovs Be eirl twv ayav vTrepeftovTcov tovto iroiovvTas twv fiev rrjs TrapaTrXrj^ias eyKXr]fid.Ta>v e^aipelv, rat? Be tt)<; vireprjcpavias vtroftaXXeiv 1 5 alnais ; wairep av el tis tov dyeXrfs flowv /caTacfrpovovvTa, Kal firj fiovXo/ievov eivai /3ovkoXov, els inreprjcpaviav fiev ovBa/j.<£s, els Be <f>pevwv e/ccTaaiv alTidtfievos, tov dtrdaifs Trjs oltcovfievrfs ttjv fSaaiXeiav ical to yeveaOai Kvpiov twv diravTay^ov o-TpaTO-rreBwv firj KaTaBe^ofievov dvrl tov 20 fiaivecrdat, TeTV<pwa0ai (f>alrj, 1 67. 'AW ovk eo~Ti Taina, ovk eo-Tiv ovBe r}fj,ds fiaXXov rj eavToiis 01 Tavra Xeyovre? BiafSaXXovai. to yap ivvorjcai fiovov, oti BvvaTov dvOpcotrela (pvaei Trjs a^tas vtrep<ppovrjaai eKeivrjs, Belyfia tear

2 Ti/irir] tpvyqv cy || 6 eira] i) f ei vulg || 7 ayvoias Se byz |] 9 too-ovtu--oirti) bfz henr oliv || 10 ypa^aaBai bz || 12 ejri] inrcp yz || 19 Sexofievov vulg

4. els Svv. t. ifi.] 'to the best of my ability ' : cp. els Svi/afuv tV rjiieripav iv I (note).
5. ffrpar. . . . j3a<riXe(as] Cp. vi I ov yap virep ffrpaTTrylas obdt j8ao*i\elas ijfuv 6 \6yos ; and, for the contrast between (iaa Ckdu. and lepaabvq, iv 1 rrjs /3a<ri\eias, %s ob roaovtos 0(TO9 rrfs Upojffbvrjs ry ffetp \byos. See too Chrysostom's treatises adv. oppugn, vit. monast. (esp. II 67 b), and comparatio regis et monachi : also DCS ' St Martin of Tours ' for

the story of St Martin and the Emperor Maximus.
7. airovoias... avoids] 'arrogance ...folly.''
II. robs fiiv kt\.] 'to charge with folly those who reject small honours. ' T\apaTraha> is, literally, ' to strike a false note ' : so 'to lose one's wits.'
13. tovto x<k.] i.e. SiairTvovras. 10. Tervip&aSai] 'to be puffed up with pride. '

III. i]

DE SACERDOTIO

49

clvtwv T(Lv eK(j>ep6vTwv early 17? e'xpvai trepl tov -irpdr/fiaros B6^rj<!. el yap firj tgov tv^ovtwv avro, Kal wv ov 7roXv<} 6 X6709, evop.i£ov elvat, 01/8' dv viroTTTevo-ai. tovto e-7rrj\dev avToli;. 168. Aid ri yap Trepl rfj<i twv dyyekwv d%'ia<s ovBels eroXfirjae ti toiovtov vtrotTTevaai wore teal elirelv, 5 otl eoriv dvQpwwlvi] -^rv)(rj Bi dirovoiav ovk av eXoftevt) eirl to rrj<s $>vo-em<; Keivr)<; df-iw/ia eXdelv; p,eya\a yap Ttva <pavTa£6ue8a trepl twv Bvvdfiewv eiceivcov, ical tovto rifias ovk d<pl,T]ai irio-Tevaai, oti BvvaiT dv avdpwiros t^? Tt/A^9 tppovrjaai ti fiel^ov e'tfeii/J??. 169. "XlcrTe avTovs 10 p,dWov BiKaiws av Tt? ypdyfraiTO dirovoia's, toi)? tjp.wv tovto KaTqyopovvTa^' ov yap dv iroTe trepl erepcov tovto vireXaftov, el p/r) irpoTepov avTol tov TrpdyfiaTOS, &>? ovBevo<; ovtos, KaTeyvcoaav. II. 1 70. Et Be irpd<; 86%av opwvTas tovto ireTTOirjKevai <f>aal, trepfiriinovTe'; eavToi? iXey^drj- 15 aovrai. Kal pa%6p,evoi <pavepw<;. ovBe yap olBa ttolov; dv eTepous trpb tovtcov e^rJTrjaav \6yovs, el twv rrj<! /cevoBotjla? rjp.d'i rjOeX-rjcrav dtraWa^ai iyKXrjpaTwv. el yap ovto<; p.e 7TOT6 elcrrjXOev 6 epw<s, KaTaBk^aadai pdXXov e^prjv rj tpvyelv. 171. Aid ri; oti iroWrjv r)piv tovto ttjv Boljav 20 ijvey/cev av. to yap ev tovtw tt}? rjXiKiai; ovra, Kal irpb /3pa%eo<i diroaTavTa twv j3uotik<5v <f>povTi,Bwv, effatyvi)? ovtq) Bo^ai -jrapd Trdcriv elvat OavfiaaTov, (bore twv tov

1 om avrwv cfyz |] 6 ovk apcxo/ievy codd omnes praeter emu || 9 Svfarai z vulg || 15 <tyq<rov(Ti bz henr || 18 p.01 xore fz

1 . t&v (K<j>ep. ] ' those who express it': i.e. the thought in question.
id. y$...66£i)s']i.e.66£Tisr}i'l-xov<ri.
I. tuv tvxovtwv] partitive genitive: ' a common-place matter' : cp. i 4 tj)k Tvxovaav (note).
6. &ti (ffTtv ivdp. ^.] ' that there is any human soul which through arrogance would not care (choose) to accept the rank 0/ that class (of beings).'
II. Ambition, again, was not his

ruling motive : for that would have led him to accept so high an honour, not to reject it.
14. opwrras] sc. rums.
15. TrcpnriirT. {.] 'contradicting themselves' : Field Homm. in Matt. Index II s.v. ircpnriirTcir.
17. irpb Toiirwj'] ' instead of these.' 21. iv roinp t. 17. 0.] 'being as young as I am ' : see i 3 Upiaaivi\s (note). 22. Piwtik&v] Cp. jSiwtikoO i 1 (note).

N. C.

4

50

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. II

airavTa %p6vov ev rot? ToiovTot,*; i^avaXcoOevTmv irovots irpoTi/jLTfOfivai, Kal TrXeiovas yfrr)cf>ov<; ·jrdvrav ixeCvotv Xa(Seiv, Oavfj-cMTTa, riva Kal /MeydXa irepi rjfjbwv irdvTas av viroiTTeveiv eireure, Kal o~efivov$ av rifia<; Kal Trepi/3XeirTOV<} 5 Karecrrrjcre. I J 2. Nvv Be, irXrjv oXiywv, to irXiov t?}? eKK\i)<ria<i fiepos oiiBe if; ovofiaro? iqfia<; to-ao~iv So-re ovBe oti ·jrapT)TJ]/j,0a iracriv eari ipavepbv, dXX' oXlyoi? tut'iv
obt ovBe avToiis ol/aai to aacpes elBevat iravTat, et'/co? Be Kal tovtcov iroXXov<; rj p.rjS' oXcos r)fid<; rjprjadat vopiaai rj io irape&crOat fiera, tt)v aipecriv, dveiriTr)Bei,ov<; eivat B6f;avTa<;, ov"x eKovTa<; (pvyelv. III. 173- BAS. 'AW' oi TokyOes elBoTe*} 0avfidaovTai. If2. Kal firjv tovtovs e<f>r)<} a>? KevoB6^ov<; Kal hireprj<pdvov<; BiaffdXXeiv r)/ia<;. ir66ev ovv eaTiv ekirlaai tov eiraivov ; dtrb t5>v iroW&v; dXX, ovk 15 %o~ao~i to o~a$e<i. dXX* e'« twv oXiywv ; dXXa KavTavQa rj/uv els Toivavriov 6 \0705 irepiTeTpairrat' ovBe yap erepov twos eveKev evddBe elo-rjXOe<; vvv, dXX' Xva fiddrjs, tL irpbs eKUvovs diroXoyi]o-ao~0ai Biol. 174. Kai tL tovTtov eveKev aKpifioXoyovfiai vvv; oti yap, ei Kal irdvTe<; 20 fjBeo-av TaXr)0e<;, ovBe ovtcos 17/xa? dirovoias r) $>iXoBot;la<; eSei Kpiveiv, (iixpov dvdfieivov Kal tovto eiarj o~a<pa><;' Kal 7rpo? tovtq) irdXtv eKelvo, oti, ov tok TavTrjv ToXfiwai tt)v ToXfiav fiovov, etirep Tt? eo~Tiv dvdpcoirmv, ov yap eyooye ireiBofiai, dXXa Kal tois irepl eTepcov virotrTevovo~t, KivBvvo? 25 diroKeio-eTat. ov p.iKp6<;.

7 earax vulg || 8 aXX' ei/eos abcfyz henr oliv || io -rrapeuipao-Bat. y henr || 16 o Xoyos] to Trpay/xa. cnuy' vulg || 25 ciruceurcTiu vulg

4. tiiroirretitu'] ' to expect ' : cp. on ii 4 (iriroirTetieui).
9. fir/S' SXtos] ' not at all.' 10. wapeu>o-$ai] 'that I was rejected' (rapaSetv). III. Chrys. finally rests his defence on the magnitude and responsible character of the priestly office,

of which he feels himself to be nilworthy.
16. tls Toivavriov kt\.] 'your argument has veered completely round.'
23. oi yip (y. tt.] sc. nxa elvai. : ' I do not believe that there is such a man. '

III. IV]

DE SACERDOTIO

51

IV. 175- H yap lepmavvT) reXeirai p,ev eVt yri<s, ra^iv 8e hrovpavuov e%i irpayfidTcov. ical fid\a ye ei/coTO)?- ov yap avOpcoiros, ovk ayye\o<;, ovk dp%dyye\o<;, ovk aXK/q Tt? KTiaTt) hvvafii<;, dXX ainoi 0 7rapa/c\r/TO? ravTrjv SieTa^aro ttjv aicoXovOiav, xal en yukvovra^ ii> o~ap- 5 kX ttjv dyyiXcov eireicre (pavrd^crOai, Biaicoviav. Bcb ^prj rbv lepa>p,evov uxTirep ev avrol<i io-T&ra tois oipavol<; p,era^v t&v Svvd/iemv iiceLvwv ovto)? elvtu icaOapov. 176. <&o/3epd p,ev yap ical (pptKeoBecrTaTa ical to, irpo ttj? %dpiTO<;, otov oi KtoScoves, oi poccrKoi, oi XiOoi 01 tov arrjOovs, oi Tr}? 10 7ra)/i.i'So5, 17 /urpa, 17 Ki8api>>, 6 irohripr}^, to ireraXov rb Xpvo-ovv, rd dyia t&v dylmv, r; 7ro\Xr/ t&v evBov r/pe/j,ia'

1 en ttjs 777s vulg || 2 rayiuxruv byz henr vulg || 6 tt\v tow 0775X011' z vulg II IO 01 eirt tou ottjBovs b vulg

IV. The majesty ofthe High Priest under the old dispensation is as no thing when compared with that of the Christian Priest, above all at the time when he is celebrating the Holy Eucharist.
For the doctrine of Chrys. with regard to the Eucharist see Bp Cosin Transubstantiation c. vi art. 8 (Engl. Translation of 1679, pp. 109 sq. ) ; Pusey Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist pp. 543--597, Brightman Eastern and Western Liturgies vol. i Appendix C, pp. 475--481 : see also Introd. p. xviii.
1. lepwairri] Cp. i 3 lepuxrivr}! (note).
2. Tdlix kt\.] ' ranis among things celestial.'
5. &Ko\ov9lav] ' the order ' of the priesthood.
6. tpavT&fcvdai] ' to represent.' 9. tppiKiaStaTara] After the po sitive (/>oji( pd we might have ex pected <pptKil>Sri : but cp. iii 15 07(0 ical (ppiKuMctTara, vi 13 a/vac 7roXeyiuwTdTous (note) : also Mason Five Orations Index III s.v. #to-ros. ib. to irpb rrjs X-] X&P'S >s some times used, as here, to denote the new dispensation, /coivt) 8io9i)kij ; cp. in

S. Barlaamum martyrem 686 D el dt *irl ttjs 7ra\atas diad^Ktjs roura airirybpevro, TroXXy fiaWov iirl ttjs X&piTos. This use is probably de rived from Jn i 176 vifios tita. Mui/crius iS68ri, r) %A.pis icol 7; a.\-ij(lua dia 'Itjaou X/hittoO iytvero.
10. oi Kwduves ktX.] See the description of the dress of the High Priest in Ex. xxviii. KJiSuves are the ' bells ' (72 in number) on the hem of his upper-garment : potaxot = 'pomegranates,' also on the hem (I.e. vv. 33, 34) : Xifloi oi t. or. = the twelve stones in the breastplate, inscribed with the names ofthe twelve tribes (vv. 17 -- 21), but according to others the Urim and Thummim (v. 30) : oi tjjs iic. , sc. \l0oi, = the stones on the shoulder-pieces (vv. 6-- 12) : i) fdrpa ' the mitre,' and tj KiSapis ' the diadem,' which with the ' sacred crown ' (to tt^toXoi' below) composed the High Priest's head dress (vv. 36-- 38) : TroS-ijpris (tunica talaris) = the robe reaching to the ground (v. 31). See Hastings' DB art. ' Priests and Levites,' 'Crown,' 'Mitre,' etc., and litera ture there quoted.

4--2

52

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. IV

d\X' et Tt? ra tt)<; %dpi,TO<; e^erdoeie, fiiicpa, ovra evprjcret. ra <po/3epd real (ppiKmSearara iicelva, ical to irepl tov vo/jlov \e%0tv icavTavda aXffdk^ ov, on Ov BeBo^aarai ro SeSo^ao-ftevov iv tovtw tu> jiepet, eveicev tt)<; vTrep/3a\\ovcTT]<} 5 8o£t;?. 177. "Orav yap ?8j?? tov icvpiov reffvpivov ical Keipevov, km tov dp^iepea i<f>eaTa>Ta Ttp 6v/j.o,ti ical iirev^ofievov, ical TrdvTas eiceiva) tw Tifutp <poivoo-icop.evov<; alfiaTC, dpa eTi fieTa. avOpoairav elvat vofii^eK ical eVl yr)<; eo-Tavai, aX.V ovk evdew; eirl tov? ovpavov? pberaviaTao-ai,, ical irao-av 10 aapKLKT^v Stdvoiav t?j? i/ri/^779 eicftaXwv yvfivr) ttj ifrvxf) ical tg> vw KaQapw irepLftXeTreis to, iv ovpavols ; 00 tov 0av/iaTO<;. d> tj)? tov 0eov (piXavOpcoTnas. o p-era tov TraTpos dva> ica0r]/j,evo<!, KaTa T-qv wpav i/ceivrjv rat? airavtcov KaTeyerai, %epoi, ical SiSwcnv avTov rot? ftovXo/ievoi? 15 irepiirrv^acrOai, ical irepikafielv, troiovcn Se tovto ira,vTe<; Sid Tmv 6<f>da\fi£)v Tore, apd o~oi tov KaTa<j>povelo~0ai

6 tov ifpea cfmpu vulg || 7 Tio 0eiu <j>oa>. koi Ti/wa ai/tari y || (poi.vi.aaop.evovs y vulg || 8 eiri rrjs 777s vulg |) 10 rys trap/cos CK^aXuv f || 15 woiovai] fiKeirovat. c franc || 16 totc] r/p xurreus bcfhkstz henr vulg

3. Xex^x] 1 Cor. iii 10. 5. 8rav yap jctX.] This passage is of great importance as illustrating Chrysostom's conception of the Eucharist. While Gregory of Nyssa had taught a qualitative unity between the Eucharistic elements and the body of our Lord, Chrys. goes further, and speaks of a complete identity between them. SeeHarnack History of Dogma vol. iv (Engl. Translation) p. 297, Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. (ed. Srawley) p. xl. This view was afterwards perfected by John of Damascus (Harnack op. cit. iv p. 301), and remains the doctrine of the Eucharist in the Greek Church to the present day. Cp. Joh. Damasc. de fide orth. iv 13 obic (an tvwos 6 dpros Kal 6 olvos tov awfiaros ical aifiaros XptaTov (p.ri ye'voiTo) dXX' abro rd aw/ia tov Kvplov Te8ewp.ivov. See also Inlrod. p. xviii.

7. irivras ticelvtp ktX.] This implies that the cup was (as it still is) in the East given to the laity (hence irdvras) ; Brightman op. cit. i p. 479.
ib. <potvurK.] Perhaps there is an allusion to the custom of applying the finger to the moistened lip after receiving the cup, and of touching the breast, eyes, and ears.
9. iraaav aapic. Sidv.] Cp. Liturgy of St James (Brightman, p. 41) and Liturgy of St Chrysostorn (ibid. p. 377).
10. -/v/wri] 'naked': i.e. free from the integuments of the body,
16. Sta tQv 6(pff. rbrc] Some MSS (see critical note) substitute ttjs irlareas for rbre : but Chrys. (as Harnack has said) agrees with Gregory of Nyssa in the assumption of an essentially corporeal effect of the participation in the sacred elements.

III. iv]

DB SACERDOTIO

53

TavTa a£ia KaTa<f>at,verai, rj roiavTa etvai, &>? SvvrjOfjvai riva Kal iirapOrjvai /car avTwv ; 178. Boi/Xet xal elirepov ffavfiaros t?)? ayiaGTela? Tawi/9 ISelv Tr)v virepfSoXrjv ; VTroypaiJrov fiot tov 'H\tai> Tot? o<j>0a\p.oi<;, Kal tov direipov 6')(\.ov irepiearwra, Kal ttjv dvaiav eirl twv \l6cov 5 Keifievrjv, Kal Travras fiev ev r^uvyia tov? \0f7r0u9 Kal TroWrj rfj o-iyrj, fiovov Be tov Trpo§r\Yr\v evyitjievov elra iHaLfpvrji; T-qv <j)\6ya e« t&v ovpavajv i-rrl to iepelov pnrrovfievr/v. ffavfiaara, ravra Kal trdo-r)<; eKTrKrj^ea}^ <yep,ovra. 179- MeTayS^^t toLvvv eKeWev eVi ra vvv TeXovfieva, Kal 10 ov 6avp.acna oyjrei fiovov, dXXa Kal irucrav eKTrXr/^iv virepfSalvovra. earrjKe yap 6 lepevs, ov Trvp Karacfrepcov, aWa to Trvevfia to ayiov Kal tt)v iKeTr/piav eirl tto\v Troielrai, ov% iva xt? X.a/u,7ra9 avmOev cMp&elaa KaTavaXaxTr/ ra irpoKelpeva, dX\' iva r) %api? eiriireo-ovaa rf) dvaia oV eKe'ivrit 15 Ta? diravTcov dvdyjrr/ \jrv)(id<s, Kal dpyvpiov Xapirporepas diroBei^r) ·ireirvpcop.evov. 1 80. Tavrrjs ovv Tr)<; <ppiK(o-

BeaTaTt]<; Te\eTr)<; ti? fir/ ccpoBpa fiaivop£vo<; fiTjBe e^eo-rrj#a>? inrep<ppovrjo-ai Bvvqaerai; r) dyvoets, oti ovk dv iroTe dvOpcoirlvT) ifrvxr/ to Trvp eKeivo rfj<i 0vo-ia<s iftdo~Taoev, 20 dXX' dpBrjv dv divavTe<i rjipavio-d-qaav, el fir) iroXXr) rr)<; tov deov %aptT09 r)v r) fjorjdeia; V. 1 8 1. Et yap Tt? evvor]aeiev oaov eaTiv dvdpanrov ovTa Kal en aapKi Kal a'CfiaTi

3 ayurraat a ayiorr/Tos c || 14 afpedeiaa yz e£a(p0a<ra f || 18 nep.Tjvus c || 20 epatTTa^cy cf

3. ayiaarelas] ' sacred office.' 4. rbv 'HX/ax] 1 Kings xviii. 12. i<TTt)K( yip. ..to ay.] For the invocation of the Holy Spirit in the celebration of the Eucharist, see Brightman op. cit. i 480 n. 23. 13. ttjv Ikct. iirl w. x.] 'offers prayer for a long space.' 'iKerriplav = lKefflav. For ^7ri 7ro\t) cp. Justin Martyr i 65, Didache 10. 14. ivuBey a.<pdeiaa\ 'kindled from above.'  18. i%iaTi\Kiin\ ' insane ' : cp. <ppe»&> tKBTOBiv iii I.

11. ipSr/v] 'utterly' (fr. ojpu). V. The power of absolution given to the priest puts him far above all earthly sovereigns, nay above the angels themselves. The priest is also entitled to greater respect than one's parents, because it is through him that men realize that they are the sons of God. On the subject of confession and absolution, see notes on ii 1 : also Batiffol Jitudes d'histoire et de theologie positive (Paris 1902).

54

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. v

ireTfXeyp,evov t?}? fia/capias Kal aKr/paTOV <pvcrem<! e/cetVij? eyyiil Bvvr)6r)vai yevecrdai, Tore oyfrerat, Ka\m$, 00-175 Tovt lepeii Ti/J,f}<; r) tov irvev/j,aTO<; r)%Lmcrev %agt?. Bid yap exelvmv real ravra reXelrai, Kal erepa rovrmv 01/Bev diro5 BeovTa, Kal et? agidtfiarcxs teal eh crmTr)pla<; rr}<; r)fjLTepa<; Xoyov. 182. Ot 7ap ttjv yr)v oIkovvt<! koX iv Tavrr/ troiovp.evoi ttjv BiaTpiftrjv to, iv ovpavoK ScoiKeip iireTpd·jrrjaav, ical i^overlav e\a/3ov, fjv oine ayyeXois ovre ap%ayyeXoi<; eBaxev 6 deos. ov yap irpos ixeivov*} eipr/Tai' \o"Oera dv BrjcrrjTe iirl tjj? yr)<;, eerrai BeBepeva ical iv rq> oipavm- Kal Sera av Xvcrrjre, ecrrai XeXvfieva. 1 83. "E^ova-t fiev yap ical oi icpaTovvres e7rl tt)? yrjs tt/v tov Beer/ieiv i^ovaiav, aXXd crmfiaTrnv fiovov ovtos Be o §60740? airr}? dtrreTai rfjs ^frv^fj<;, ical Biaftalvei Toi"? ovpavoi><;, ical airep IS av ipydacovrat Karoo oi iepei<{, ravra 0 0eo<i avw icvpol, ical ttjv t&v BovXmv yvmp/qv 6 BeaTr6Tr]<s /SeySatot. 1 84. Kal ti yelp aXV r) traerav avToi? rf/v oipdviov eBcoicev eljoucriav ; *Q,v ydp av, (fyrjcrtv, aepfJTe Ta? dfjuapriaf, cupicovrai · Kal mv av Kparfjre, KeKpaTrjVTai. Tts av yevoiTO ravTT]<; igovcrta 20 fie'i^mv ; traerav rr)v Kpleriv eBmKev 0 irarrjp rco vim' 6pm Be Traerav avrr/v tovtov; iyyeipier8evTa<s vtto tov viov'

1 vepnreirXeynevov bz henr vulg || 1 1 XwijTe] + exi T175 777s z vulg || XeXvfj.eva] + ev tu ovpavu vulg || 13 fwvwv f || 19 KpaTrjaifre fyz || t( av yevono Toirri) j T7is e{o wrtaj iiu^ov f || 2 1 avrrp> rovrovs eyxfi-piadeurav abfyz henr || TOV Xpiffrov y

4. (rtpa tovtuv ktX.] ' other things not less than these'': cp. d7roS&K iii 7.
5. eh...\6yov] 'with regard to dignity and to our (spiritual) welfare': cp. iii 6 els Kara(j>povri<rews \6yov.
9. oi yap rpbs iic. etp.] a reminiscence of Heb. i 5 sqq.
10. $<ra av 8i}<r7jT6] Matt, xviii 18 (5<ra idv SjoTrre iirl Tr)s 77)5, (crrai SeSepiva iv oipavy' Kal o<ro iav Mo-Tfrt iwl ttjs yijs, to-rai XeXvpe'va iv oipavif WH.). On this passage

of St Matthew, and on Jn xx 23, which Chrys. next quotes, see Report of a Conference held at Fulham Palace in Dec. 1901 (Longmans, 1902) pp. 3--29.
18. uv yap ok] Jn xx 23 (iv tivuv a<t>9frc t. a/iapr., aipitavrat oi^tois- &v rtvuv up., KCKpdrrivTai, WH.).
20. irao-av tt\v Kp.] Jn v 22 (ttjv Kp. iraaav WH.).
21. eyx^pioSivTas] Cp., for the construction, fcri^Xaav Trio-Tevffijvai ii 2 (note).

III. ]

 5000

55

  649   ,          ,      . 8.       '             , 5   ,      ·        
      ,      ,    , '      -    . 1 86. "  ,   ,    ,           . 187.           ,       , 15  6      ,     ,    ,       ,         ,     ·    
       ,   20    ; 1 88.   ,      ,                  ,

3  £ II 13 ] +    || 2 1 «]   || 24     £ II  -    1> 

9· 5 .  4.~\ / )
 ( .'  = ,   ^  5 ^ .
II. -£  ] . - ; 6\  5·
15- '   .] ^  5 (^ \.).
7· ] 50. ,   · : ]  53-
19.  ] '  .'

20.   ·( . .] 
: 5    ,!  . (().
21. . .] . 2 .  8     ! ·
 . 22. !...&] . . 
19  ,  \ . 23· .  /).] . .
 14, .  27.

56

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. v

fieXrj lyivofieQa t^? fiaica,pla$ iiceivt)s ice(f>a\fjs. 1 89. "flare fyfuv oiiK dp^ovrav fwvov ovBe (SaaiXewv (poftepd)Tepoi, dXXd Kal irarepeov ri/iiwrepoi BiKabaxf av elev. oi fiev yap eg ai/iaTOov Kal eK deXrjfiaTOS crapKo<; eyevvrjo-av oi Be tt)<; 5 eK tov 6eov yevvr)<reco<; rffiiv elaiv atriot, rfj<; fiaicaplas < traXiyyeveaia<; eVceii/ij?, rrj? eXevdepias rfj<; aXr/dov<;, Kal TJ79 Kara ydpw vlodeaias. VI. 190. Aerrpav acofiaTOS airaXKdTTeiv, fiaXXov Be diraXXaTTetv fiev ovBafiwf, rov<; Be aTTaXkayevTas BoKifidi^eiv fiovov, etyov egovaiav oi tmv 10 'lovBaitov iepels' Kal olada ttiSs TrepifidyifTov r)v to t&v iepewv Tore, ovtoi Be ov Xetrpav ado/MiTO?, dXX' aKaOapaiav ^WY^S, ovk dtraXXayelcrav BoKifid^etv, dXX' diraXXaTTeiv iravTeXu>$ eXa(3ov egovaiav. 191. "Clo-re oirovrav VTrepop&vres 7roXii Kal twv irepl AaOav elev av evayearepoi 15 Kal fiei^ovos dgiot Tifiwpias. oi fiev ydp, el Kal fir) TrpoarjKovar}^ avTolt avreiroiovvTO rfjs apj(tj<i, aXX ofio&s Oavfiaarrjv riva irepl avrrj<; efyov Bogav, Kal tovto t&5 fierd <iroXXfj<; ecpieadat ottovBt)? eBeifjav ovtoi Be ore iirl to KpetTTov BieKoo'firjOr], Kal TOo-avTijv eXaftev i-rriBocriv to 20 irpayfia, Tore el; evavTiat fiev eKeivoi<;, iroXXm Be eKeivtav fiei^ova TeroXfirfKaatv. 192. OvBe yap Xcrov ei<s KaTa(f>povrfo-eas Xoyov i<piear&ai fir) irpoo-ijKovar)? Tifir)<; Kal virepopav dXXa ToaovTcp fiel^ov eKeivov tovto, o<ro) tov BiairTveiv Kal

3 oiKtuoi av eiev \oyifeir0cu z || 6 T7/S e\ev0epas ab || 7 vio6e<rias] + napeXOfievr/s y || 8 tods airaWaTTOfn.evovs byz henr || 14 ttoXXw vulg || om av z vulg II 17 om (cot tovto--eSetj-av z || 22 VTrepopavJ + togovtw ayadwv vulg || 23 eneivo tovtov y vulg

1. <ce#aXf)s] the head is used for the whole person : cp. vi 13 (5 <pl\>l Ke^aXi) (note).
4. il- ai/xdrac] Jn i 13. VI. The priest is able to render far gi-eater services to his flock than any father can render to his son. 7. X^Trpw] Lev. xiii. Cp. Jerome's comm. upon Matt, xvi 19. 14. Aa$iv] Numb. xvi.

19. rooair-qv f\. in.] ' made such progress ' : i.e. was so enhanced in power and dignity.
21. els Karatpp. \6yoy] Cp. els i^iilinaros X070X iii 5 (note).
23. iatp ktX.] This clause would normally have run oVy tov SiairTveiv fieifroir to BavptA^eiv : but cp. too-ovtov vhtlwv [i] f^/tla) 6aov ...tijj icriiaews e'xaTe'pas rb ixiaov

III. vi]

DE SACERDOTIO

57

davfid^eiv to fikaov iari. 1 93. Tt? ovv ovrto? a6\La ^v^f), a>9 roaovrmv virepihelv dyaOwv ; ovk av iroTe (pairfv iya>, ifbjqv et Tt? oilarpov inropeiveie hatpoviKov. 194. AXXd tyap eTrdveifii irdXiv, odev e^eftrjv. ov yap ev tc3 KoXd^eiv jiovov, dXXa Kal ev tgj iroielv ev, p.eL%ova toI<; lepevcriv 5 eScoK hvvap.Lv twv <f>vo-iKa>v yovecov 6 deof Kal toctovtov dp.<pOTeptov to hid<f>opov, oaov t?)? Trapovo~r)<; icai tj;? peXXovo-tjs £g>?7?. 195. Ot p.ev yap eh TavTijv, 01 he et? Keivr)v yew&o-f tcdicelvoi p.ev ovhe tov acopuiTiKov avToti hvvaivT av dpvvaaOai OdvaTov, ovre voaov eVei>e%#e«rai> 10 aTTOKpovaacrdai' ovtov he Kal Kapwovaav Kal diroXXvodai p,eXXovo-av tt)v y^tvx^v 7ro\Xa/a? eaaaav, rot? p,ev irpaorepav tt/v KoXaaiv epyaadp,evoi, tou? Be ovhe irapa ttjv dpyjiv d<f>evT<; ip,Treo~elv, ov tc3 hihdo~Ketv pLovov Kal vovOeTelv, dXXd Kal to5 hi ev^wv ftorjOeiv. 196. Ov yap OTav 15 'fjp.d'i dvayevv&o-i p,ovov dXXa Kal Ta /xera TavTa <7uy%&)pelv e^ovo-iv e^ovalav dp.apTrjp.aTa. 'Acdevel ydp tL<s, (pr/aiv, ev vp.lv; 7rpocrKaXeada6co Toi><; irpeo-jivTepovs tt}<; eKK\,rjo-las, Kal TrpoaevfjaaOayaav vtrep avTov, dXei^avTes avTov eXaia ev tc3 6vop,aTi tov Kvpiov Kal r) evx1"} tt}<} 20 Trio-Tews <T£0(T6t tov KapvovTa, Kal eyepel avTov 6 Kvpw Kav dpLapTias 77. TreTroirjKax;, dfyedrjo-ovTat, avTw. 197. "E7TeiTa 01 pev tpvaLKol yoveis, et Tiai twv virepe^ovTwv Kal peydXa hvvapevcov irpoaKpovaaiev 01 Traihes, ovhev

1 a$\ias ^i^C/J b a&Xtos av enj henr || 2 ovk av 7rare] + ovSeva z vulg || 3 irKyv ei ii-q Tis b vulg || 8 fa»;s] + TO ixtaov yz || 10 a/tvvai y vulg || ov voffov yz vulg || 14 apxrtv] + TroWaKts z || 19 e7r' avrov vulg || 20 om ev-- Kvpiov z vet. int. II 21 om nai--Kvpios cyz || 22 a<pe$i]<TeTai by henr || 23 0u<tikoi] (pvau { || 24 /ieya\a] + wSe z vulg

v 5 (note). For t& ixiaov cp. on ii 2 (Sari irpds kt\.).
3. oltTTpoi'] 'frenzy? 4. ofay typr/v] (to the point) 'whence I digressed.' 13. oiSk irapa t. apxf)v] i.e. oiSi tt\v apxfiv, ' not at all.'

17. dtrflevef] James v 14. 19. virep aiirov] St James (/.c.) has ^ir' avrdv (WH.). - t& d\e^. 01). A.] Cp. Mk vi 13. 22. d0eSi)o"ocTai] WH. read a<pe$r)aeTai (James I.e.). 24. itpoaxp. ]' offend.'

58

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. VI

avrovi e'xpvaiv dxpeXelv ol Se lepeis ovk ap^ovrw;, ovSe j8acr«\6t?, att' ainbv avrol<; iro\\dKi<i opyiadevTa KarrfK\at;av tov deov. 1 98. "Kt ovv r)p,d<; fiera ravra ToKfir/crei, Tt? aTTovotas Kpiveiv ; eym fiev yap etc t&v elprjfievoov Tocrav5 ttjv evXdfieiav ol/iai ra<; t&v cucovovtwv KaTaa-yelv i//-v%a?, to? fiTjiceTi Ton? tyevyovTas, aWa rot's a<f> eavTwv irpoaibvTa? Kal <rirovBd^ovTa<; ravTrjv eavTois KTr/o-acrdai ttjv Tifirjv, d-7rovoia<s Kal toX/u?/? Kpiveiv.
199. Et yap 01 Tat tg>v iroXecov dp%a<; irio-TevOevTes, 10 otov firj avveTol ical \iav o£et? Tvy-^dveoaiv ovres, Kal
rd<; 7roXet? dverpe-ty-av Kal eavToiis irpoaairdiKecrav, 6 tov X/jto-TOt) ttjv vvficprjv KaTaKoo~fj,elv \a%a>v iro<rr)<; o~oi BoKei ieladai hvvdfiews, Kal Tr)<; Trap ai/Tov Kal Tr)<; dvwdev, Trpb<s ^ to fir) BiafiapTelv ; VII. 200. OuSei? fiaWov TlavXov 15 tov Xpio-Tov r)ydiT7)aev, ovSel? fiei^ova eKeivov airovhr)v eirehei^aTO, ovSet? ir\eiovo<s rfeiwQi) yapiTO';' d\\' Sfiwi fieTa ToaavTa SeSotKev ert Kal Tpe/iei trepl TavTi;? TT79 dpxfis Kal tSsv dpxo/Aevmv vir ai)Tov. <Poftov/jiai ydp, (prjo-iv, pyq 7r&>9, to? o ocpis ILvav H~r)irdTT)o-ev, ovtw (pdapfj 20 to. vorjfiaTa v/j,&v dirb tt/<? a.7r\oTijTO? tjj? el<; tov X.pio~T0v. Kal irdikiv, 'Ev <f>o/3(p Kal iv Tpo/Mp iroKKm iyevofir/v 77-po?

1 iax"°v<siv z henr || 7 xcKTi)<r9ai b henr || tijv apxv c || 8 Kpiveiv] ypa<pe<r0ai z || 9 enwnrrevBevTes fy |] 11 a,T<i>\e<rav kcu eavrovs wpoaa.ve-
Tpct/zav c || 14 /taXXcw] + 7rX«w f || 17 TOiravra] + irKcoveKTrmaTa vulg || 19 t^rfiranjaev] + ev ti\ iravovpyia avrou yz vulg

6. da>' iavrwv] ' of their man accord.'
8. Kpiveiv] The subject of this verb is tous iKoiovras, to be supplied from -nis t&v ok. if/vx^s- The object of Kpiveiv is roils &<p' e. irpoa.
II. tou Xp. Triv v.] i.e. the Church : cp. vi 12 rijs Xpitrrov v6/j.<pr)s : also irapdivov iv 7 (note).
VII. St Paul regarded thepriestly c^« if/'M Mi? deepest awe and reverence ; andjustly so, for it demands greater abilities for its discharge than any otherfunction, as, for example,

that of the general or the navigator, 17. /nerd ToiraOra] ('after' i.e.)
'in spite of all these {advantages).' The word irXeoveKT^iuiTa, however, in the vulgate reading seems to have no MS authority.
18. 00/SoO/tcu] 2 Cor. xi 3 (<pofiov)iai 5i ixij irus, us 6 6(pis tfair&Triaev E«ai/ iv ttJ iravovpyiq airov, <t>6aprj ri. votf/mra i/j.Qv diro t^s dTrXoT7;Tos [ko! t?js dy^T^Tos] r^s e/s rbv Xpiarbv WH.).
21. iv 4>op<#] 1 Cor. ii 3.

III. vn]

DE SACERDOTIO

59

vfia<i' 20I. av0p<oiro<; ets Tpi/rov apirayels ovpavbv, teal aTropprjTWv Kowmvrjcras deov, Kal toctovtow; vTrop,eiva<s davdrovs, oaas fiera to irio-revcrat e%v\aev r)p,epa<i, dvOpm7T0? pvt)Be rfj Bo0ela-rj trapd Xpto-roO xprjo-ao~dat e^ovaia j3ov\r)8el<i, Xva firj Ti? t&v TncrTevadvTcov cncavSaXioOf}. 5 202. Et Toivvv 6 to, Trpoo-rdyfiaTa virepfiaivaav tov deov, Kal firjSafiov to eavTov ^r/r&v, dXkd to t&v dp^op.evoov, ovtcos ep,<j>o/3o<; rjv del, 71730? to t??9 apxfjs p,eyedo<; d<j>opa>v tL ireio-ofieOa fifiels 01 iroXkayov to eavT&v %r]TovvTe<;, ol Ta? evTo\d<; tov XpiaTov oi fiovov ovj^ inrepf3aivovTe<;, 10 aXXa Kal eK irXeiovo^ Trapa/3alvovTe<} fioipai ; Tt? daOevel, (prjal, Kal ovk dadevS) ; Tt? crKavBaXC^eTai, Kal ovk eym 7rvpovp.ai ; 203. Toiovtov elvai Set tov lepea, fiaXXov Be 011 toiovtov p,6vov p.iKpd yap raura Kal to p,r)Bev, 7T/J0? o fieWw Xeyeiv. 204. Tt Be tovto ecrTLv; Hv^ofir/v, <f>rjo-lv, 15 avdOep,a elvat dirb tov Xpio-Tov, virep twv dBe\<f>a>v fiov, t&v avyyev&v fiov t&v KaTa crdpKa. eX Tt? BvvaTai Tavttjv d<f>etvai tt/v (ftcovrjv, et rt? e%et Trjv i^rv^-qv TavTT)<; e<f>iKVOv/Aevr)v ttjs eu^9, eyKaXelaQai, BiKaios dv eti) (pevywv 205. et Be Tt? diroBioi Trj<i dpeTrjs eKelvr)<; ToaovTov oaov 20 97/uet?, oir% oTav (pevyrj, a\X' otov Be^r/Tat,, p,i<relo-0ai BiKato*;. 206. OvBe yap, ei gtpaTicoTtKrjs d£t'a? aipeert? irpovKeiTo, eiTa ^aXKOTVtrov, 77 aKVTOTop,ov, r\ Tiva twv

2 0eo> vulg || 3 Savovrovs] kivSwovs c || 6 tov X/hotou bfz franc henr oliv || 19 eyKakeLffdia diKaiias tpevyuv y

1. els rplrov dp. oi.'] 2 Cor. xii 2 (?us rplrov oipavov WH,).
2. roaotirovs...0av.] 1 Cor. xv 31 : cp. Ka&rjfiepivoOs 8o.v6.tovs iv 6 (note).
4. p.rjik rrj 5o0.] See 1 Cor. ix 14,15.
6. to. Trpoo'TAypM.Ta] sc. that those who preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel : see preceding note.
7. /ir/oanop t. i. f.] 1 Cor. x 33 : cp. 1 Cor. x 24, xiii 5, Phil, ii 4.
11. ix irkelovos. . .p..] 'in great

(lit. 'greater') measure.' Lat. ex magna parte: cp. vi 8.
id. tIs affBevei kt\.] 2 Cor. xi 29.
14. luxpA kt\.~\ 'small, in fact of no account whatever.'1
15. qixbp.rpi] Rom. ix 3 (Avidepu
el^at av tos ^70; airb tov XpiaTov WH.).
18. &<peivai] ' to utter' : cp. vi 12 06 yip 8$) outoi ol ro^xot Sivawr' av acpeivai <pwvi\v.

60

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. vil

tolovtcov BrjfjuovpyStv, eXKvaavTes et? to fieaov oi Bovvai Kvpiot tt)V Tifirjv, evexeipi^ov tov arparov, eiryvecra av tov BeiXaiov e/ceivov ov cpevyovra Kal trdvTa Trotovvra, ware fir) et? irpoinrrov eavTov e/j,f3aXeiv ica/cov. 20y. Et fiev 5 yap a7rXw? to KXrj6fjvai troi/ieva xal fieTayeiplaai to irpayfia to? erv)(ev dpxel, Kal kivBwo^ ovSels, eyicaXeiTm KevoBo%la<> rffilv o /3ovXofievo<;' el Be troXXrjv fiev o~vveo~iv, TroXXrjv Be irpo t?)? o-vveo-eax; ttjv trapa tov Oeov ydpiv, Kiu Tpoirmv opdoTTjra, Kal KadapoTrjTa 0iov, xal fiei^ova r) 10 Kara avdpooirov e-^etv Bel ttjv dperr/v tov tclvt^v dvaBeyofievov ttjv cppovTiBa, firf fie diroo-Teprjo~r/<; o~vyyvd)firj<}, fiarr/v d-rroXeo-dat, fir) f3ov\6p.evov Kal eiKr). 208. Kal yap ei fivpiaycoyov Tt? 6\icdBa cuywv, ireTrXT/pcofievr/v epeT&v ical (popTicov yep.ovo~av TroXvreXtov, eiTa eVt tS>v oiaicav Kadi,aa<; IS eKeXeve irepdv t6 Alyatov r) to Tvppr/viKov 7reXayo<;, ex ·irpd>Tr)s av atvetrrfBrfaa t»?¥ (jxuvr)^' Kal el tk qpero, Ata Tt;
"\va fir) KaTaBvaco to ttXoiov, elirpv av. VIII. 209. Eit<z ev6a fiev el<s yjprffiaTa r) tyf/iia, Kal 6 KivBvvos crafiaTiKov fieXP1 Q&vaTov, ovBe\<i eyKaXeaei iroXXjj Ke%pr)fievot,s trpo-

13 epeT&w] apufw,Twv y \\ Kai fivptwv tpoprioiv fyz || 15 exeXevae fy || 18 o-w/noTi/coj yz vulg

2. ipex^P^0"! ' attempted to entrust.'
4. wpofarTov] 'inevitable' (contracted from irpboxTov).
5. woip.4va\ Cp. Eph. iv n TToifitpas Kal 8i5a<rKa\ovs. For ttoinaivaiv applied to the {vIckotos or irpeafHrepos cp. Acts xx 28, 1 Pet. v 2 ; and see Lightfoot Philippians'* p. 192 n. 6, Gore The Church and the Ministry* p. 241 n. 1.
13. /ivpiayu)y6i>] lit. ' carrying 10,000 measures ' : an epithet designating a merchant-ship of large tonnage. Cp. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. II 59 E p-vpiaywybv oXfcdSa Kal iroWiov ytfiovo-av ipopriuv. Thucydides (vii 25) uses p.vpio$6pos in the

same sense : see also Pollux i 82. 14. tirl r&v ol&Kur] ' at the helm ' :
cp. vi 6 6 p.lv...M tuiv oUkwv (con p.evos. See also Field on Homm. in 1 Cor. 240 B. For the use of M we may compare M tu>v eiffwar iv 2, £tI tCiv wpay/xdruv v 8.
15. ix 7rpi4n;s...T^s (p.] 'at his first words ' : cp. airi Trpibri)s f\j/cus vi 12 (fin.).
VIII., IX. Development of the contrast between the priest and the navigator, with the object of shewing that the task of the priest is by far the more difficult.
18. o nlvtiwos kt\.] 'the risk it merely that of bodily (physical) death ' : for /^XP1 CP> on ii ! °^K toTi\ p.txPl roirov.

III. viii]

DE SACERDOTIO

61

vola- ottov Be tois vavayovaiv ovk els to ireXayos tovto, aXX' els Tt)v aftvaaov tov irvpos dwoiceiTai trecrelv, ical OdvaTos avToiis ov% 6 ttjv yfrvj(i)v dirb tov o-d>fiaTOS Biaipwv, aXX' 6 ravTrjv fieT eiceivov els Kokatriv Trapcnrefnrcov alcoviov i/cSe%eTai, evravOa on fir) TrpoireToys els toctovtov 5 eavToi/s epplifrafiev icaicdv dpyiela&e ical fiiar/aere ; fir), Beofiai ical dvTifioXw. 2IO. OlSa rrjv ifiavTov ^frv^rjv, Trjv do~6evr) Tavrr/v ical fiacpdv oida ttjs Biaicovlas eiceivrjs to fieyedos, ical rr)v iroWrjv tov "irpdyp,aTo<; Bvo-KoXlav. 211. WXelova yap twv tt)v OdXasrTav TapaTTovTwv trvev- 10 fiaTcoi' %eifid£ei KVfuna Tr)v tov lepcofievov ty-vyrfli.
IX. ical irpwTov dirdvTcov 6 BetvoTaTos Trjs icevoBo^ias ancoireXos, ^aXeircoTepos wv ovirep ol fivOoiroiol TepaTevovTai. 212. Tovtov yap 7roXXol fiev Xcfyycrav BiatrXevcravTes Bia<f>vyelv dacvels' efiol Be ovtco tovto 15 %aXeTr6v, to? fiyBe vvv, otc ovBe fila fie tis dvdyici) trpbs eicelvo rndel to fSdpaffpov, Bvvacrdai icaOapevew tov Beivov. el Be Kal tt)v hruTTCurLav tis ey^eipi^oi TavTrfv, fiovovovyl Brjaas oiriaos t«3 xe^Pe '"'O'paBwaei tois in eiceivw toj o-ieoireX<j> KaToiKovai dr/plois icaO' eicdcTTrfv fie airapaTTeiv 20 ttjv rjfiepav. 2 1 3. Tlva Be eaTi Ta Orjpia ; dvfios, dOvfiia,

10 xpcvjiuitwc] KVfiaTuv btz || 13 ur ov cm franc oliv uv ws ginrswy sin !| 01. iivdoi codd omnes praeter achmnu bed || TepaTevovrai] + (tou) twv J.ipr)vuiv vulg, et codd omnes praeter acfmnpu

4. rairiiv ... iicelvov] Note that Ta.irrt\v here refers to the more distant, iicelvov to the less distant of the two things referred to : cp. vi 1 2 iKeival re iwaipovfftv air-^v kt\. (note) : Field Homm. in Matt. 709 B.
IX. 13. itkAtcXos kt\.] The reference is to the rock (or, as in Homer, the island) of the Sirens: see Horn. Od. xii 167. TepaTei)e<r0(u= ' to tell of marvels ' (ripara), and so is here applied to the wondrous tales of Odysseus recounted by Homer.
15. daiveU] 'unharmed.'

17. Kaffapetietv] 'to be innocent of,' with genitive : cp. iii 10 iindvftlas Kadapcfcu>.
18. yu>vovovxl ktX.] 'practically tying my hands behind my back ' : Odysseus is secured in this way by his comrades, Od. xii 178.
21. ra dtipla] These ' beasts,' i.e. passions, infest the ' rock of vanity ' : i.e. are inseparable from the position of bishop. If a man lands on that rock, i.e. becomes a bishop, they make him their prey.
ib. 6v/j.6s] ' anger.' Chrys. was himself somewhat quick-tempered,

62

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. IX

<f>66vo<;, epi<;, 8ia/3oXal, Karrjyopiai, ·^reuSo?, viroicpuTK,
eirifSovXal, evyal Kara twv r/SucrjieoToov ovSev, r/Boval iirl Tat? twv o-uXXeirovpyovvrcov do-^rj/ji,oo-vvai,<;, irev0o<; iirl rati evTjfiepLcus, etraivcov epco<s, Tt/ttf)? Trodo? (tovto Srj to 5 fiaXiara irdvroov rrjv dv6panreiav exTpa^rfKi^ov ^v^rjv), StScMTfcgXlat, woo? rfSovrjv, dveXevOepoi KoXaKeiai, Owirelat dyevvels, Karatppovrjo-et^ trevrjTcov, Bepatrelai trXovo-icov, d\6yuTToi Tip,al Kal eTrt/SXa/Set? %dpiTe<s, Kivhvvov <pepovcrai Kal toI<s nrape^ovcn Kal roll 8e%op,evot<i avras, r/>6/3o? BovXoio 7rp7T^9 Kal toi<} <pavXoTaroi<! TtSv dvBpairoBwv irpoffr/Kcov /iovor, Trapprjaias dvaipecri*;, Taireivo^poavvr)^ to p.ev o~yr\p,a troXi), t) dXrfOeia Be ovBap,ov, eXey^oi Be eKTroBcov Kal iiriTip.rio-et,<;, fidXXov Be Kara p,ev twv Taireivwv Kal irepa rod p.erpov, iirl Be twv Bvvao-Teiav irepi^epXr)p.evwv 15 ovBe BtapaL Tt? ra xeCXi) ToXfia. 2 1 4. TauTa yap airavTa Kal ra, tovtwv irXeiova 6 <TKOTreXo<; eKelvo<; rpe(j>ei ffrjpia, ol? tov? cnra% dX6vra<; et? Too-avTijv dvdyKT) KadeXxvaOr)vat, BovXeiav, a>? Kal el? yvvaiKwv dpeaKeiav irpdrreiv 7roXXd "jroXXaKfi a p,r)Be elireiv KaXov. 215- 'O fiev yap 20 dela vop,o<s avTa? TavTTj<; i£ea>o~e tt}<; XeiTovpylas, ixeivai,

2 evxcu] opycu vulg [| 3 \eiTovpyovvrwv vulg || 13 Kara] «ri y || 15 to X«Xij] to (TTO/to c || 17 Toowroi'...d'oiAeias bfyz henr vulg

see his confession in vi 12 : and this was, later on, the cause of some of his difficulties at Constantinople. There seems to be an intentional contrast between $v/x6s and iSvpUa.
3. twv iroXXeir.] i.e. other priests. For \eiTovpyla see on i 4 (5<Sfijs kt\.).
4. ebri/iep.] 'success': cp. trapevr/tiepeiaSai v 8 (note).
5. iKTpaxyX] Literally, of a horse, ' throwing its rider over its head': hence ' hurling to deslrucHon.'
6. 7rpos T)hovhy\ 'flattering ' : cp. tois rpbs X&P1" Xe7o/u^Kots ii 6.
11. Tairewoipp. ktX.] 'much ap-

parent, but no real humility? 12. £kwo5<J>v~\ ' absent.' 13. kot4 p.h ktX.] i.e. Kara p.ev
twv TareivQr Kal (' even ') «-. t. /j.. IXeyxol elat.
14. twv Svv. irepi/3.] ' the great' : lit. 'those who have compassed power.' Cp. below Toaaimpi irepijSl/SXiprat S1jvap.1v, and iii 15 t\ovtov jrepi/3^/3X7jTai vo\iv.
15. diapai ra xe'Xtj] Cp. Stapat to aro/ta ii 7 (note).
18. els ywaiKwv ap. ] For instance, the Empress Eudoxia afterwards exercised her influence against Chrys. at Constantinople : Socr. vi 15.

III. IX]

DE SACERDOTIO

63

Be eavrd? elcrwdetv fiid^ovTat,' ical eireiSr) BC eavTwv uryyovaiv ovBev, Bi erepoov irpdrrovaiv airavra' ical ToaavTTjv Trepi&ifiXrjvTai Bvvaftiv a>? twv lepewv ical eyicpiveiv ical eic/3dXXeiv ow? av edeXwaf 216. ical rd avco kcltu) (tovto Br) to rr}? irapoifiLas early IBeiv ytyvo- 5 fievov) tov<! dp^ovrwi dyovcnv ol dp%6fievoi, /cat eWe fiev avSpes, dXX' ah ovBe BiBdo-tceiv eiriTeTpairrab' ri Xiyw BiBdcrKeiv ; ovBe XaXelv fiev ovv avTal<; iv eKKXrjcria crvvey(0)pr]<rev o fia/capioi UavXo<i. eyw Be Tti/o? rjicovcra XeyovTo?, OTi ical Toaavrrj'i aurals fieriBwicav Trappr/aias, a>? ical 10 iiriTi/iav toi<! twv eicicXricnwv irpoecrTwcn, ical Kaddvrecrdai ·KLKporepov eiceivwv rj twv ISLwv oliceTwv ol Beairorai.
217. Kat fit) fie rt? olecrdw iravTai t<u? elpr)fievai<{ virofSdXXetv alriai<s. elcrl yap, elcrl ttoXXoI ol tovtwv virepeve%devTe<; twv Blktvwv, ical twv dXovrwv irXeLovs. 15 X. 218. 'AX\' ovBe ttjv lepwcrvvrfv aiTiacraip/rfv av tovtwv tcSi' KaKwv p-7] 7TOT6 ovtw fiavelrjv e7<». ovre yap tov alBrjpov twv <j>6vwv, ovre tov dlvov r»)? fieOrf;, ovre Trjv

1 etaw 0etvai yz vulg ei<rw0i)vai s || St' eavrav] + ktois y || 4 ovs eav fiov\uvtcu bfyz henr || 5 Kara] + -rroiovai f oliv || rapoifuas] + \eyo/i.cvov yz vulg || om yvyvop.evov fyz || 10 //.CTeSaiKC y vulg || 14 vwepexovrts y || 1 6 airtaaaini. av vulg -r\Ti.aaa.ja\v us tovtuv tuv KaKuv curiav y

I. el<ru0eiv] Cp. els Trp> aaxnf^>civt}v eltrwBeiv iavras /Sidfoircu quod regtdares feminae etc. 249 c.
3. lis tuv lep.J 'so that they choose and expel priests at will."
4. tA dvu icdTM] a proverbial expression (ri -rijs lrapot/das) : cp. iii 14 ira ko\ Kara rapdrrovaa.
6. effle pJkv Avtipts] ' would that it were men (who did this) : on the contrary, it is those who may not even teach ' : see 1 Tim. ii 12.
8. oiS& \a\e?v] 1 Cor. xiv 34. II. Tois...irpoe<rT&<ri] Cp. t<Si> TtpotaTiiruv iii 10; ol wpourrd/ievoi is found in 1 Thess. v 12, Rom. xii 8 ; ol rryoi/xevot in Hebr. xiii 7, Justin

Martyr Apol. ii 1 : see Gore op. cit.* p. 221 n.
ii. Ka0dirTe<r0at\ ' to rebuke ' (with gen.), a classical use: Thuc. vi 16 (ire 181) /xov Nucias KaB^aro.
X. The priesthood as a whole cannot in fairness be reproached with the unworthiness of individual priests. These should, however, be chosen with the greatest possible care, Especially is this true of bishops: for if they are unfitted for their responsible duties, the consequences to the whole Church will be grave indeed.
18. tQv <p&vav] sc. afriavainrjv dv.

64



[III. 

  ,      ,      -               . 219· '/     5   ,    .  /3          ,     ,  ,     .        ,      -  ,     ,  '     ,          . 220.  , , 07  '     <,   5   6     ,          . 221. * ,  ,        - ;   <   , ,       20        . 222.   ,    ,                  ,   '    ,   ' 25    ,     ,  , ,    &

4   1§ || 8 .\%\ ! * +   || 9    ' II  7 *"" *>  ;* || 1 1  -  .] (5 5
   -  .. .  ' 1§    . , . ..    -  ^...»   ! 20  

5· .]   5 .  .  '  &, &1 ' ( ) :  ' ' ( ^).
.   / . .]  : /
   /' : .  4 0 7 6'* ^^

 (). 8.  ] '' : .
 4   (). . $   (.] ' 
  /' :   . 14
     ;  13, 8.

III. x]

DE SACERDOTIO

65

iavT7)<; irpoaam-oWvai amfia. 223. "Oirep Xva fir) ical vvv yevifrai, ev rrj rd^ei tgov iroSdov rjfid<! e<f>v\aljev o 6eo<>, rjvirep ical i\d%ofiev e£ dp^rji.
224. IloXXa yap icrnv, to Bao-iXeie, irpbs tok elpr)fievoi<;, iroWd erepa, d tov lepcofievov e%en> XPV> Vf16^ Be 5 ovk eyofiev, Kill irpo ye t&v aXXiov iicelvo' iravra^pOev avT& 7-77? rov TrpdyfiaTos eTrtOvfilas icaOapeveiv Bel rrjv i]rv)(rfv. 225. 'fi? edv trpoo-iraOSis irpb<; ravTrjv Sta/ceifievo<; Tvyrj rrjv dpyijv, yevo/ievos stt' avTrj<; la^vpoTepav dvd-jTTei tt)v <j)\6ya, ical Kara /cpdros dXovs inrep tov 10 fieftaiav e^eiv avrr)v fivpia virofievet Beivd, xdv KoXaicevaai Bey, icav dyevve<; ri ical dvd^iov inro/ieivai, icav ")(jpr\fiaTa dvak&crai iroWd. 226. "On yap ical <f)6vcov ra? eicickr)* at'a? eveifXtjadv rives, icai iro\et,<; dvacrrdrovi eiroLrjaav, inrep Tavrr\s fiaypfievoi, tt}<; dpyfji;, irapirffii vvv, fir) ical 15 a-rricna Bo^co Xeyeiv Tiaiv. 22J. 'E^p^j/ he, dlfiai, TocravTiyv rov Trpdyfiaros ey^eiv ev\df3eiav, a>? ical rr)v dpxfjv i/c<j)vyeiv tov oyicov ical fieTa, to yeveadai, ev avTrj fir) irepi/ieveiv ra<; erepav icpLo-ei,<;, el iroTe o-vfifSairj icadaLpeaw licavbv epydcraaOai dfidpTr/fia, dXXd wpo\a{36vTa eicftdWeiv 20

13 7ro\\a] ovBer irapaiTou/iccos z || 17 tjjs apxns eKip. yz vulg || 18 ev anTM vulg || 19 ras Trap' erepav npiaus z vulg

8. TrpoffTraBQs . . . SiaK. ] ' warmly attached to, ' ' attracted by. '
13. <j>bvwv kt\.~\ The allusion may be to the struggle for the Bishopric of Rome in the year 367 between Damasus and Ursicinus. In one of the Roman basilicas 137 dead bodies were found after an affray which took place during these riots : Amm. Marcell. xxvii 3. But more probably Chrys. is thinking of the scenes of violence witnessed during the Arian controversy : Socr. iv 15. Tds iKK\i)o-ias is here used of the sacred buildings : Suicer s.v.
17. Tr/v apx1)"] ' atfirst ' : cp. ii 4 7rd\ie d7a7etc 8dev &^?re<re tt)v

apxfy. Some MSS read 7-775 apxn*, ' of the office, ' and airy which follows is thought to favour that reading. Ai)tjJ, however, can quite as readily be referred to the ttjs apxrjs which follows pmx&iwoi.
19. KaBalp. kt\.] 'a sin sufficient to bring about deposition.'
20. rrpo\a@. £c/9. i. ] Cp. the case of Gregory of Nazianzus, who voluntarily relinquished the Bishopric of Constantinople in 381. For the contrast in Trepi/iiveti/ and TrpoXafibm-a ( = ' beforehand,' as at iv 1), cp. de virgin. 277 E oiSi an rty iKebuv repUitere irpoSv/dav, dXXd irpokafiiav avrbs &V c/(T7;77;<raTO.

N. C.

K

66

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. X

eavrbv TJ79 dpxVf o^too /nei* 7ap «ai eXeov eiriairdaaaOai irapa rod 0eov etKO? rjv. to Se avTeyeaQai irapa to irpe-

irov rrj<i afia?, iraar)? kavTov diroo~Tepelv o~vyyvd>/j,r)<; earl

ical fiaXXov i/acaieiv tov deov ttjv opyr/v, Sevrepov %aXe5 Trcbrepov -rrpocrdevra 7rXr)fi.fieXr)fia. dXX' ovBeli dve^erai

Tore' Beivbv yap dXr)0(o<;, Betvbv to TavTiys yXi^eadai t>)?

Tififjs. 228. Kat oil /xa'Xpiievo'; tg3 fxaicapUp UavXa \eyeo,

dXXd Kal iravv o-vvaBcov avTov toi<; pr\p,ao-i. tl yap eKelvo<; (prjatv; E? Tt? eTrio-K07rrj<; opeyerai, icaXov epyov

10 eiridvuel. eym Be ov tov epyov, T779 Be avOevTuas Kal

BvvaaTela<; e-mOvp-eiv elirov elvat Beivov. XI. 229. Kal tovtov olfiai Belv tov ttoOov Trdo-rj airovBfj tjjs ^jrv^ij^

e^adelv, Kal fir/Be ttjv dpfflv KaTao"yedr\vai avTrjV xjtt

avTov o-vyx<i>p&v, Xva fier eXev6epia<; airavTa ai)Tw irpaT-

15 Teiv e^fj. 230. 'O yap ovk eTTidvfi&v eVt ravT7]<; Bet^Or}vai Trj<; i!jovo-ia<;, ovBe ttjv Kadaipeaiv avTrjs BeBoiKev oil

SeSotKO)? Be, fieTa rrj<; irpoo-r}KOVcrr)<; Xpio-rtai/ofc eXev8epia<}

iravTa irpaTTeiv Bvvair av. 23 1, 'fl? oX ye (pofiovfievot,

Kal TpefiovTes KaTeve^Orjvai eKeldev iriKpdv VTro/ievovo-t,

20 BovXeiav Kal ttoXX&v ye/iovo-av r&v KaK&v, Kal dvdpdmois Kal 6eq> irpoaKpoveiv dvayKa^ovTai TroXXaKis. 232. Aet

Se ov% ovtq) BiaKelcrdai ttjv i/rt/^i>, dXX' &o~7rep ev Toll

TToXifiois Tovt yevvalovs r&v aTpaTicoT&v opStfiev Kal iroXefiovvrai; trpoOvfiax; Kal TrLirTovTas dvBpeiw;, ovt<o Kal

25 tou? iirl TavTTjv rjKOVTas ttjv oUovofilav Kal lepdadai Kal

5 TpoffTiffevra fz || 7 ±Iau\w] + TauTa vulg || 20 ye/iovcri y

6. yXlxeoOai) 'to covet.' 9. ft t«] 1 Tim. iii 1. 10. a.i6evrias\ 'absolute sway': cp. iv 5 yuera aiffevrlas, ad Theodorum lapsum II 40 C. Similarly aiOirrris in late Greek = ' despot ' (see L. and S.). XI. A bishop need not grieve if he is deposedfrom his office by unfair means. His reward hereafter will be proportionately great. He must in every way guard against ambition,

which Chrys. admits to be his own besetting sin, not to be overcome except by flight.
15. irl Tairi\% Sei^.] ' to gain fame in this position of authority.' This version seems better than ' to be appointed to (over) this position,' for this would require dxo8eix0'?''<" rather than the simple verb.
25. olKovoidav] 'office': cp. oIkovo/jiav i 5 (note).

III. xi]

DE SACERDOTIO

67

trapaXveo-dai 1-7)9 dpxfjs, a>9 X.pio-Tiavols earl trpoarJKov dvBpdo-iv, et'Sora?, £09 r) TOiavrrj KaOaLpecris ovk iXdrrova <pepei TJ79 apXHS T<>v o~T&<pavov. 233. "Orav yap tk, virep tov fir/Bev airpeires fiyS' dvdfyov ti t?}? a^ia<; virop.elvai eiceivr)<;, ir&Or) ti toiovtov, teal Tots aBiKa><; KadeXovai ttjv 5 KoKaaiv, teal avTco p,ei£ova irpo^evel tov /uadov. M.a/cdpioi yap, cprjcriv, ecrre, orav oveiBLcroocri koi Bidt^wcriv vfidi, ical eiTrcocrt trav Trovrjpbv icaff vfiwv, yJrevB6p,evoi, eveicev epov. ^aipere Kal dyaXXiaade, oti ttoXv} ecrriv 0 p,io~8b<i vficbv iv rot? ovpavols. 234. Kat Tavra p,ev orav inrb t&v 10 6p,0Taycov rj Bid <p86vov, r) 777)09 irepcov ^dpiv, rj trpb<; airex&eiav, rj erepm rivl firj 6p6m Tit eKfidWrjTai XoyicrfiS. 235. "Orav Be ical inrb tcov ivavricov tovto irda^eiv crvfifiaivr/, oi/Be Xoyov Beiv olfiai irpb<: to Bei£ai to KepBot oo~ov avrw Bia tt)<s eavTmv crvXXeyovai Trovr/pias eKeivoi. 15 236. Tovto ovv Bel iravTa^oOev vepicrKotreiv Kal dicpift&s BiepevvaaOai, p,rj irov Tt9 cnnv8r)p Trj<; etridvpias eice'ivr)? ivTv<p6p,evo<; Xddy. 237. 'Ayatrr/Tov yap Kal tow el; ap^rpi KaOapevovTas tov trddovt rjvi/ca av epirecrwo-iv eh rrjv dp%r)v Bvvqdrjvai tovto Biacpvyelv el Be Tt9 Kal irplv 20 rj Tv^eiv t^9 Tip,fj<i Tpecpet trap eavT<t> to Beivov Kal airr/ves tovto Orjpiov, ovBe eo-Tiv eiireiv els ocrqv eavTov ififiaXei Kap,ivov p,eTa to Tv%eiv. 238. 'H.p,ei<! Be («ai firj toi

4 ava£tov ti] om ti vulg || 6 tijv tijo\v abwyz henr || 16 ira.ina.xov okottciv yz i| 17 Siepewav vulg || 18 evTV<pap.evos z vulg || 22 ep.pa.Wei cfz

1. lis X/hot. kt\.] a senarius (comicus) : cp. on ii 1 6 t&s airdvTiov kt\.
6. irpolievei] 'procures': cp. iv 9 fielfova. Tpol-evrjffai t6v /ua86v. With this verb is connected the adj. trpb{epos, found at iii 15 Trpocpdaeis a.1 Tafrrris Tp6£tvoi t^s ti/j.tjs, and v 1 jroXXGi' irpbl-evov ayaBdv.
ii. /landpioi] Matt, v II, 12 (Srav dveiSlauaiv ifias ko.1 Subl-woiv
WH.).

11. bp-orayuv'] ('ranged in the same row ' i.e.) ' equals?
12. \oyiap.$] ' appetite? ' impulse ' : cp. vi 3 Xo7«ryiids Utoitos: and see Field on Homtn. in Matt. 492 D.
18. dyairriTiv kt\.] ' We may Be satisfied if those who are innocent of that passion at first are able to escape it': cp. iii 14 d7o?ri;T6i'... Svvr)8iji>ai. 'E/nriffoxru' implies the danger and temptation of power.

68

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xr

vo\iicrr)<i fierpid^ovTa<; r)p.ds iOeXfjaai av irore ijrevaaa6at 7T/305 ere), -jroXXrjv TavTt\v iceKTijfieda ttjv iiriOvfilav ical fiera r&v dXXcov dirdvTcov, oir% tjttov 77/ui? ical tovto ecfrofirjo-e ical irpos ravTrjv erpeifre ttjv <f>vy>]v. 239. K.a6d5 irep yap 01 crcofiaTcov epwvres, eeo? fiev av wXr]o~lov elvat, r&v epa/Aevav e^fj, ^aXeircoTepav tov irdOovi ttjv {Hdxravov e%ovo~tv orav Be a>? Troppwrdra) to>v iroBovfievcov iavToii<t diraydycoai, ical ttjv fxavvav airrfKaaav ovtco ical toI? ravTijs e7ri6v/j,ov<Ti rf)<; dpyfis, orav fiev irXr)crt,ov avTrji to yevwvrat,, dcpoprjTov yiyverat to icaicov · orav Be aTreXirl-
crcocri, ical ttjv etriOvjiiav fiera ttj? TrpocrBoiclas ecrfteaav. 240. Mia /lev ovv avTrj Trp6cf>acn<; ov fittcpd' dXXa ical el fiovrj Ka6' eavrr/v ovtra eTvy)(avev, itcavrj TavTrjt; rjjia* direlp^ai ttjv af;ia<;. 15 XII. 241. Nw Be ical erepa Taurus ov% rjTTmv irpoo-reOeirai. ti? Be ecrriv avTij ; vriqbdXiov elvai Bet tov iepea, ical Biopariicdv, ical fivplow; iravra'^oOev xeKTrjaOai Toil? 6<f>8aXfiov<i, a>? ov% eavTto p.ovov, aXXa /cat ·jrXrjdei %wvra TOcrovTcp. 242. 'Hp,ei<; Be on vcodpol icai 20 irapeip-evoi ical 7r/?o? ttjv eavrwv fioXi<; dpicovvTe<; awrqpiav, teal avTos av 6/J,6Xoyrjcreia<}, 6 p,dXio~ra irdvTmv ra r)p.eTepa, Bid to <f>iXeiv, tcpvwTeiv cnrovBd^cov icaicd. 243. M^ yap fioi vqcrreiav evTavda eiTrrjs, firjBe dypvirviav, fiTjBe ^apLevviav, ical ttjv Xoiirrjv tov crdo[iaTo<; cricXrjpaycoyiav. ical 25 TovTtov [iev yhp ocrov direyop,ev, oiBa*}' el Be ical et? dicpi-

1 e0e\ri<rai o»] + n yz vulg || 13 ucaprfl + t)v z || 24 om \ourr]v y

I. jueTpictfoyTas] Cp. fterptdfoKra ii 5 (note).
10. Srav Si d7re\7r.] ' but when they have ceased to hope.'
II. tafSeaav] gnomic aorist: cp. dpyiaaro ii 3 (note).
XII., XIII. A bishop is called'upon to face many difficulties, and to exert constant selfrepression : a task to which Chrys. feels himself to be unequal.

16. vi/tpiKiay] 'sober'' cautious' : see 1 Tim. iii 2, which is again referred to in vi 5 (subJin.),
17. p-vplovs kt\.] like Argus in the legend of Io: Aesch. P. V. 678.
20. irapeipAvoi] 'feeble.' 23. vrjiTTdav ktX.] Cp. ii 1 vqoTdav (Lanei jctA. (notes). SkXijpaywylav = the ascetic life of the monk.

III. xn]

DE SACERDOTIO

69

J3eiav fjfuv tcarcopdooTO, oiiBe outcb? fiera, tj/9 irapovarji; v<o9p6TT)T05 tayycrev av ri 77-/30? ttjv eiricrTacriav r)p.a<; ravTa Qxf>eXr)crai, exeivr/v. 244. 'AvOpcoTrw p,ev yap et? oliciaKov TLva, tcaraKXeicrOevTi,, ical rd avTOv fiepifiv&vTi, povov, iroXKffv av ravra Rapaaypi, rr)v axfceXeiav et? Be 5 toctovtov a^i^ofieva) irXr)8o<;, ical icad eicaaTov t&v dpXpfievwv lBi,a<; iceicT7)fj,evq> cfrpovriBas, ri Bvvair av 7rpo? ttjv iicelveov iirioocnv d^ioirio-rov crvfiftaXXecrdai icepBo<;, eav fir) yffVXVv evrovov ical layypoTar'qv e^aw fvyr); XIII. 245. K.al fir) 6avp,dcrri<; el p,era ToaavTT)'; /capTepbas i0 erepav fidcravov ^tjtw t% dvBpela<; tt)<; iv "^vyrj. 246. To fiev yap aiTwv ical ttotwv ical crTpwfivr)^ icaracppoveiv diraXr)?, 7ro\Xot? ovBe epyov op&fiev ov, ical fidXicrrd ye Tolf aypoiKOTepov Bt,aicei/j.ivoi<;, ical ovra><; etc 7rpwrr)<; rpacpeicrt Tr)<; r)XiicLa<;, ical ttoXXoi<; Be erepoi*;, rr]<; re rov 15 <7<t>p.aT0<; KaTaaicevfj<; ical rrj<; crvvrjdeia<: egevfiapt^ovcrrjs tt)v iv eiceivoK Tot? ttovoii rpayyTr]Ta. vftpiv Be, ical eirrjpeiav, ical Xoyov (fropriicdv, ical rd Trapd t&v eXarTovtov crKcofifiara rd re a7r\w? ical rd iv Biicy Xeyofieva, tca'i fiefiAfrei<; rd<; elici) ical fidrrjv Trapd rwv dp%6vTcov ical 20 Trapd t&v dp%op,eva)v ytvofievas, ov t&v ttoXX&v eveyicelv, d\X' ei>09 ttov ical Bevrepov. 247. Kal 1B01 re? av tow iv eicei,voi<; lcrr)(ypov<i 777309 ravra ovtco<s l\iyyt&VTa<;, a>?

10 iiera ToaaxiT-qv Kaprepiav cfyz || II ttjv ev tt) tytixq z vulg || 12 Kara<ppova»] awexeaBai y || 23 itrxu/wepws Y

3. els olidffitov kt\.] There is an interesting similarity between this passage and Dem. de Corona 258. 21: (wipas fiiv yip dwaaiv ivSpiiiroiS 4<rri rod /3(ou Bivaros), k&v iv oULaicip m aiirbv Ka0(lp!;as Typy : cp. Introd.
p. xxxiv. For oIkIitkos cp. also vi 7, 12, where it is used of the cell occupied by Chrys., in which the conversation with Basil took place.
8. di^iriffTop] i.e. d^idXoyov ; ' considerable,' ' important.'
XIII. 13. oiSl tyryoc] 'by no

means difficult.' 16. ££evp..]' making easy' 19. dirXuis] 'casually,'1 i.e. as
opposed to a formal judgment : cp. below, and iii 10.
22. ivbs irov koi S.] Cp. iii 14
hi ixbvu) fj Sevriptp xP^Mf"0" 0'^Vi v 6 ?»a jui\t$ t\ Seirepov. See also Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii (ed. Hort-Mayor) p. 322, Schmid Atticismus Index s.v.
23. /XryyiwvTas] ' losing their heads.'

70

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xm

fiakXov r&v ^aXeTrmTdruyv dypiaiveiv drjpUov. 248. Toil? Btj TOiovrovi /jidXicrTa t&v Tr)<; lepcoo~vvr)<; direip^ofiev irepifioXeov. to p.ev yap p,tfre 77-po? ra avra a.Tri)yXpvia0ai p,rJT difwiroB'qTov elvai tov Trpoeo-r&ra ovBev av ftXdijreie S to koivov Trjs KKX7)aia<;' #17109 Se aypios etf re tov kckttjfiivov et<? Te tov? irXrjo-iov pgydXas epyd^eTai o~vp.<f>opd<}. 249. Kal Tot? p-ev eiceiva p,r) iroLovaiv ovBepia direiXrj irapd tov Oeov KeiTai' toi? Be a7r\<w? opyi^o/J.evoi'i yeevva Kal to t?}? yeevvr}*; r)ireiXr]Tai, irvp. 2 50. "Qcnrep ovv 6 10 B6%r)<; ip&v Kevrji, OTav tt)<; twii iroXXwv dp^r)<; iiri\d/3t)Tai, pei^ova tu> irvpl Trape^ei ttjv vXr/v ovtgh; 6 lead* eavTov Kal iv Tat? 7rpo? oXlyow; o/uXiat? Kpareiv 0/37575 p,r) Bvvdp,evo<;, dXX' iK<pepopevo<; ev%epco?, orav irXtfOow; oXou irpoaTaaiav ip/Triarevdfj, KaOdirep ti dripiov iravTa-^oQev 15 Kal viro pvpicov KevTOVfievov, ovts avTos iv r)0~v-)(la Bvvavr av 7TOT6 Bidyeiv, Kal Toir? iptricrTev6evTa<; aiiTtS pvpia SiaTiOrjo-i KaKa. XIV. 251. OvBev yap ovtcd KadapoTijTa vov Kal to BieiBe? OoXoc T(Sv <ppevo3v a>? 6vp,6<; aVa/CTO? Kal p,eTa ttoXXt}? tpepopbevo? tt)? pvp,r/<;. 252. Outo? 20 yap, (fyrjcrtv, diroXXvo-i Kal <f>povip,ov<;. Kaddtrep ydp ev tivi WKTOp.a'yLq o~K0T(o8el<} 6 t?)? yfrv)(rj<; 6(f>6aXp,6<; oi>% evpio~Kei BiaKplvai tou? (piXov; toov TroXefiicov, o&Be toi/?

i /xaWov tw aypiatvovrwv xa^lraiviLV ^VP* f II T0V* Se roiovrovs y vulg |] 8 Tots tie ravra a7r\ws opyi^ofievois c || 19 8v[j.os yap fprjtnv wyz vulg || 21 <TKort<r$tis fy || 22 ovdc rous evrt/wvs rwv arifiwv bz henr vulg

3. Trpbs ra aira a-irrryX'] i*e* to live at the point of starvation.
8. dTrXois] ' without reason ' : so above. The reference is to Matt. v 22.
13. tic<pep. ei.] 'flying into a passion.'
16. rois tfiir.] Atari$4vai takes in Chrys. two accusatives, one of the person, and one of the thing: cp. Homm. in Epist. ad Rom. 452 D

dXV airep av adrods ol £x&P°l &*£' dr/aav, ravra iavrois Karcipydaavro.
XIV. A passionate temper is a grave fault in a bishop: and, in general, the weaknesses of those in high places are a bad example to others, who are ready to imitate the faults of their superiors.
18. to Si. 6o\.] ' troubles the clear waters.'
20. (pijo-l] Prov. xv 1 (lxx).

III. xiv]

DE SACERDOTIO

71

aTifiovi t<£p ivTi/Awv dXXa ·Kaaiv e<pe^r)<; evi Ke^prjrai
Tpoira), kclv XaBelv ri Bey Kaiebv, airavra evKoXa><; v7rop,eva>v, inrep tov TrXrjpcSaai, rrjv rfjs ^v)(rj<s y8opt)v. 253. 'H80vrj yap ri<s eariv r) tov dvfiov irvpo)o~i<;, Kal rjSovrjs %aXe·Kwrepov Tvpavvei rrjv yfrv%r)v, iraa-av avTfjs rrjv vytr) 5
Karda-Tacrtv dvco ical koltco rapdrTovcra. Kal yap irpos dirovoiav at pet paSiWi Kal ej(6pa<; d/caipov<; Kal p,lao<; aKoyov, Kal irpoo-Kpov^ara dir\w<; Kal eiKr) irpoa-Kpoveiv TrapaaKevd^ei tTwe^oS?, Kal iroXXd erepa roiavra Kal Xeyeiv Kal irpaTTeiv f3id^erai, iroXXw tS poL^m tov irddovs ia rr)<; i|ru^? inroavpofMV7]<;, Kal ovk e^oi/crr)<? oiroi Trjv avTr)<i epeiaaaa Bvvap.iv dvTio~Ti]o~eTat, irpoi roaavTr/v opp.f]v. 254. 'A\\' ovk en, o~e elp(ovevop.evov dve^opai irepaiT&pw Tt? yap olSe, <pTjaiv, oaov ravrrji; d-ire^eis tt)<; voaov ; 255- Tt ovv, e<f>r)v, m paKapie, fiovXei, irXr)0-lov fie tt}<; 15 Trvpd<; dyayelv, Kal irapo^vvat to 0r)piov r)pefiovv ; r) dyvoeis, d><; ovk olKeiq. tovto KaTropdcoaafiev apery, dXX' e'/c tov rr/v r)av)(lav dyairav ; tov Be ovtco BiaKeifievov dyairrjTov i<p' eavTov fievovTa, Kal kvl fiovm r) Bevrepa Xpcopevov (f>CXq>, Bwr}0r)vat tov eKeWev Bia<f>vyelv ifiirprj- 20 afiov, p.r) oti et? ttjv afSvaarov t&v togovtwv ifiireaovTa <f)povTi8wv. 256. Tore yap oi>% eavTov fibvov, dXXa. Kal erepov! TroXXovf eirtavpei p.ebv eavTov 7rpo? tov tt)<; diroi-

XeLas Kprjp/vbv, Kal irepl ttjv Trj<; eirteiKeLas evipeXeiav dpyoTepovs Ka8io-Tr)o-i. irecpvKe yap, &>? to, 7roXXa, to 25

6 (nraparrowa y' || 11 ottou yz vulg || rrjv avrris tpewoi aSwa/uav Kat avTurrrjverai y* || 1 7 apery] Siva/xa y || a\\a ru rt)v riavxmr 07. aby

1. Kixpirrat] Cp. Kexpfic8ai ii 1 (note).
10. jioffij) t. jr.] 'by the rush (impetus) of passion.'
16. irapof. t6 $r)p. r)/).] The opposite of our ' to let sleeping dogs lie.' Note the position of iipefiovv (lit. ' the beast as it sleeps ') : and cp. vi n Tots votr-finao-i Xvttukti,

roirots. 19. A/yair. 8w.] Cp. iii 11 iya-
ici\rbv . . .Svvr)$iji>a.t. id. £<p' iavrov lUv.] Cp. vi 6
jxivttv i<p' iavrwv, vi 7 p.ii>wv t(p' iavrov.
id. hi p-bvu? r\ Sevr.] Cp. iii 13 iv6s wov Kal Sevrtpov (note),
it. /ii) 6n] ' much more.'

72

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xiv

t&v dpypp,kva>v ir\r\Qo<i aiairep et? dpyj-TVirbv Ttva elicova tovs t&v dpypvTwv Tpoirovs bpdv, ical irpbs itceLvovs e£op,oiovv eavTovs. v&<; ovv av Tt? Ta<; eicelvwv iravcreLe (pXeyfiova*;, oiSaivcov ai>To<; ; tw S' av iiri6vp.rjo-ie Ta%e<a? S t&v iroW&p yevicrOai /tteTpto?, rbv apypvTa bpyiKov op&v ; 257- Ov yap eo-TLV, ovk ecm, Ta t&v lepewv icpvirTeaOal e\a,TT(bfiaTa, dXXd ical to, p-iKpoiara Ta^ecos KaTaBrjXa yiverai. 258. Kcu yap aOXrirrjs, eco? p,ev av oiicot, fievtj ical fiTjSevl crvp,ir\.icr)Tai, Svvair av XaOelv, kclv acrOeve10 crraro 9 cov ti>XV orav 8e aTroBvcrr/Tai irpbs tovs dy&vas, pa.8icos eXeyxerai,. ical r&v dvdp&ircov toLvvv oi fiev rbv ISicoTiKOV tovtov KaX dirpayfwva ftiovvTes /Stoi' e^pvai, 7rapaTreTaap,a t&v Ihiwv dfiapTfifidrcov tt)v fiovasatv els
hi to fieaov d^OevTes icaddirep Ifidriov Tr)v r)pefiiav diro15 Svvat dvaytcd^ovTat, ical iracn yvp,vds eirihel^at ras ijrt/^a?
Sid t&v e^coOev Kivrjp,aTcov. 259. "Qairep ovv avT&v rd KaropdcofMara ttoWovs wvrjcre, irpbs rbv icrov irapaKaXovvra ^fjXov, ovtco xal rd ir\r)fip.eXrjfiaTa padvfioTepovs tcare<TTijo~e irepl rrjv t??9 apeTrjs ipyaaiav, ical ftXaiceveiv irpos 20 tovs virep t&v a-rrovhaLaiv irapeaicevaae irovovs. Sib xpr) irdvToOev ai/rov to icdXkos dirocrTlXfSeiv TJ79 ^v^rjs, *va ical eixppaiveiv dfia ical (paTt^eiv SvvrjTai Tas t&v opcovrmv ip-v^ds. 260. Ta /j-ev yap t&v tv\ovt(OV dp.apTr\p,aTa, tocrirep ev tivi aicoTcp irpaTTopeva, tovs epya^opAvovs 25 dirdtkecre p,6vovs' dvSpbs Se eiri<f>avovs ical iroXkols yvu-

4 tis S' ok evreiSriJete z || 6 ov yap eoTU>] + Swaroc y || owe cart] + Swarov z vulg || 7 Ta /XLtcpa z vulg || 9 dwarat \av6aveiv vulg || curBevearepos y || 14 epTifuav c || 15 avoSei^ou. yz || 19 /S\aKeue<r0<u bfyz henr oliv

1. roiis . . . Tpdwovs] i.e. els tovs rpbnovs. In comparisons where two prepositional clauses are coupled together byws = 'as,' the omission of the preposition in one of the two clauses (that which is not introduced by ils) is frequent: cp. v 1 oik idi~Kovaiv us irpbs SiSaffKdXovs 6ta.Ke?<rdai tovs X^yovras (i.e. irpbs tovs \4yov-

ras), vi 7 ti? xei^vl (note): see other instances in Field on Homm. in Matt. 471 A.
10. irpbs tovs ay&vas, j>. {\.~\ a senarius : cp. on ii 1 6 ras aravTuiv ktX.
19. jSXa/cctfeu'] 'to be indolent.' 2 1 . avrov] to be taken with rrjs i//vxvs.

III. xiv]

BE SACERDOTIO

73

pifxov TrKrjfAfieXeta kolvtjv airaai <f>epei rrjv f3\d/3r)v, tow; jiev avaTreirraiKOTa'; 7rpo? rovs iiwep twv ayadwv lSp&ra<; VTTTicorepovs iroiovaa, roiif Be irpoaeyeiv eavToif /3ovX,ofiAvowi epeOi^ovaa 71730? airovoiav. 26 1. Xwpls Be tovtwv to fiev twv ei)Te~kwv "irapaTTTwpaTa, kolv e« to p.eo~ov e\0y, 5 oi/Beva eirky^ev d^ioXoyov Tr\r)yrjV ol Be ev rfj Kopv<f)f} TauTT/? Ka8rjp,evoi Trj<; Tipfj<; irpwTov pev irdalv elo-i Karacrfhoi, eirena Kav ev rot? piKpordrot,'; a(j>aXdoai, peydXa Ta piKpa T019 a\\oi<; tyaiveraf ov yap tc5 perpm tov <yeyovoTO<; dXkd ry tov BiapapTovro<; d^ta t^i> dpapTiav 10 fi.erpovo'iv cnravTes. 262. Kal Bet tov lepea Kaddrrep tmtIv dBa^avTlvoii ottXok ire(j>pd'^8ai rfj re cvvtovw arirovBfj, Kal 777 Birjveicei irepl tov fiLov vrfyfrei, itdvToQev re -nepicKoirelv, pr) irov tis yvpvbv evpwv tottov Kai 7raprjpeXr)fj,evov ttXij^t) icaipiav nfK^yrjv. irdvres yap TrepiecrTtficacri rpwaai 15 Toip,oi Kal icaTaf3a\elv, ov twv ej(6pu>v povov Kai iro'kep,uov dXXa Kal avrcSv ttoWoI twv irpoairoiovpeviov (piXiav. 263. TotauTa? ovv eiriXeyeaOai Bel yfrvxds ola Ta twv dylwv eKeivwv direBei^e owpaTa r) tov deov %api? ev Trj HafivXmviq, Kapiva irore. ov yap K\r)paTl<; Kal irlaaa 20 Kal o-TVTTireiov 17 tov TTvpos tovtov Tpocfyrj, aWd 7roXi) tovtwv ^aXeirwTepa, iirel pr]Be irvp to alaOrjTov viroKeiTai Keivo, ott' 17 irap<\>dyo<; ai>Tov<; 7779 ftao~Kavia<i irepio-Toi%l£eTat, <f>Xol;, TravTaypQev alpop.evr), Kal aKpifteo-Tepov

I TXrjfifieXijfLa c || 9 tw tov yeyovoros [icyeOet. vulg || 12 x0pa%^ai] + ravroffer z vulg || 13 iravToBev irepio~KoirowTa vulg || 17 (piKiav] <pi\ei.it bcz franc henr (piXuv y || 23 avrov vulg || 24 eiraipofievrj fz eTLvetiofievrj y

1. Tom...ifaTeTT. ktX.] 'making the remiss even more supine ' (ivairewT. from iyairlTrroi 'to fall back').
6. oiSiva ktX.] lifKyi-ev has here two accusatives: (1) of the direct object, obSiva, and (2) a cognate accusative, itXtjt^i'.
16. ix^P^"] genitive with ttoXXoI,

which must be supplied from the next clause.
18. twv ayluv in.] Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego: Dan. iii 27.
20. kXt;/i. kt\.] ' brushwood, pitch, and tow': cp. ad Theodorum lapsum I 7 B.
23. Paa/caplas] ' envy,' ' ma/ice.'

74

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xiv

avrmv eiriovcra KaX Biepevvcafiimj tov ftlov rj to irvp Tore rwv iralBcov eKelvcov to, o-mfiara. orav ovv evpr) KaXdpr)<; t^vof fiiKpov, irpocnrkeieeTai ra^eax;, koX to pev aaQpov eiceivo KareKavce pepot, ttjv Be Xonrr)v 'diraaav oiKoBoprjv, 5 Kav tcov r/XiaKcov cLktivwv ovaa XapirpoTepa ti>xV> <*7r' i/ceivov tov Kairvov irpoaecpXe^e ical rjpavpcoo-ev airaaav. 264. "Eta? pev yap av iravTayoQev r/ppofffievos y KaX<S<} o tov lepew; /3Lo<;, dvaXcoros yiverai rat? e7rf/3ov\at?  av Be

Tuyr) fiiKpov ti irapiBmv, ola etKO? dvOpwrrov ovra ical to 10 "jro\vir\ave<; rov fitiov tovtov "irepwvra ireXayos, ovBev
avrm twv Xoiitwv KaTopdcopaTcov ocpeXos ·jrpo<; to BvvrjOrj-

vai to. Taw KaTqyopcav cTTopara Bt,a<f>vyelv, dXX' eirio-Kid^et iravrl too Xoittw to piKpbv eiceZvo ·jrapdirTcopa.' Kal oi>% a>?

adpica irepuceipevip, ovBe dvOpwireiav Xa%6vTi (pvatv, aXX' 1 5 a>? dyyeXcp, KaX ttJs Xot7TJj? daOeveias drrr/XXaypeva), Bt/cd-
%eiv airavTes eOeXovcrt, tS lepel. 265. Kai KaQdirep Tvpavvov, eo)9 pev av KpaTy, airavTes irecppiKao-t ical KoXaKevovci, Bid to prj Bvvaadai KadeXelv, orav Be iBcoo't irpoyapovv eiceivo, ttjv ped' viroKplo-ew<; d<pevT$ Tipr/v oi 20 77730 ptxpov <pl\.oi yeyovaaiv i^ai(f>vr)<; e%dpol ical iroXepioi, ical irdvTa avTov rd cradpd KaTapa06vTe<; eTrnidevTat, ical irapaXvovai Trj<; apxfjs' ovtco Br) ical eVt twv iepemv, oi irpb fSpayeos, ical r)viica expaTei, TipoovTes ical OepairevovTe'i, orav piKpdv evpcocrc Xafirjv, irapao-icevd^ovTai o-<poBpw'i>

1 eTreuTiovffa f || 2 cvprj'] exv c || 4 oacodofiiav cfyz || 10 Trepaiatvra c Tepaiovvra vulg || 1 2 ra tujv KaTtiyopujv\ hie incipit cod 1 || 13 eis tovvovtiov Trpoxupovvra eKewov ra Trpayfiara cy' vulg || 21 jcai Kara\vov<n c || 22 irapa\vovres vulg || 23 Oepairev.] KoXatcevovres c

6. tov Kairvov trp. kt\."\ a hexameter : cp. on ii 1 6 ras airavTav kt\.
14. aapKa irtpic] ' covered with flesh.' For the construction cp. aXovpylSa Kal SiaSrifm wepiKelp-eyos ad Theodorum lapsum I 17D.
15. rrft XoiTrjs io-S.J This seems to be for ttjs tujv \olttwv dadevetas.
19. incTvo] i.e. the power of the

tyrant. The words iiccivov to irpdytiara in the vulgate reading give the correct sense : but the MS authority for them is very slight. Tlpoxupovv is here used of ill-success : see L. and S.
22. rapaMovai rijs &pxv*] Cp. Thuc. vii 16 riv /xiv 'SikIov oi irapi\vo~av ttjs apxys.

III. xiv]

DE SACERDOTIO

75

ov% a>? Tvpavvov fwvov, aXXd /cat n tovtov ^aXeTrcoTepov Kadaiprjo-etv /teWovres. 266. Kal &airep eiceivos rovs (rco/ACiTcxpvkaicas BeSoitcev, ovtco Kal ovto? tov<> irXijalop Kal o~vXXeiTovpyovPTa<; avTw ixdXuaTa iravrav rpe/j.ei. ovre yap erepot, nve<t ovrto rr)? apxfjs eiriOvfiovo-i T77? 5 iiceivov, Kal to. iiceLvov fiaXiara Travrcov laaaiv, a>? ovtol' eyyi)6ep yap oWe?, el ti GVfifialr) toiovto, irpb twv aXXav aladdvovraf teal BvvatvT dp ei^epwt; Kal ZiajSdXXopre? ·7ria-Tv07]vai, Kal Ta fjuKpa fieyaXa Troiovvre? top avKO(pavTovfievop eXeiv (to yap diroaToXiKOP iicelvo pr)fi,a 10 dvTecrTpawrai, xal et ti Trdcry^ei ep fieXos, ^alpei, irdvra rd fieXr)1 zeal el So^d^erai ep /j.eXo<;, irdo-^et, irdvTa rd /ie'Xr/") TrXrjp et Ti? evXafielq iroXXri 71750? dwavra arr/vai SuvTjdeir}. 267. Ei? Toaovrov ovv fifias eKTrefnreis TroXe/iOP ; xal 717)0? /jid^v ovtco TroLKiXrjv Kal iroXvetSf) ttjv rj/xerepav 15 evo/Miaas apKe&eiv yjrv)(i]P ; iroOev, Kal irapd tiVo? fiaOcop ; el fiev yap 6 Oeos tovto uveTXev, iniBeil-op rbv xpijcrjiov, Kal iret0o/xai' el 8e ovk e^et?, dXX' dirb Sd^i;? dv6p<OTrivq<i (pepei? rrjv ifrfjcpop, airaXXdiyr)6l TTOTe e^a7raTw/j,epo^. virep yap twv r/fieTepav r/filp fiaXXov r) erepois ireLOeaOai 81/caiov, 20 eireiBrj rd tov dvOpcoirov ov8el<; olSev, el fir) to irvevpM tov

I « ti tovtov xaXfir. fz /cat tovtov vulg || 2 tous tov itw/mtos 0uXa/cas z vulg || 6 waaiv outoi yz || 7 « re z vulg ]| 1 1 avyxaipei franc oliv vulg || 12 <ri7«ra<rx« z vulg || 13 euXa/3«a iroWt) (nom.) vulg || 14 eu] vpot fyz || 15 ovTia] + Kai vulg || 16 apxav fyz || 17 amXex] cod u secutus sum av etSev c franc e^T^icroTo af avriyyeCktv (aTtryytikev) ceteri cyviapurc vulg

6. Kal Ta £k.] 'nor do they know the character ofthe tyrantprofoundly, as these' (sc. know the character of their bishop). Outoi -- ol (rvWeirovpyovvres.
10. iiroowT....pij/ia] 1 Cor. xii 26
(efre ira<rxel t* M^<"> inmrdaxtt wavTa rd /«Aij  etre Sojdferoi fU\os,
ovvxaipei iravra rd /^X7j WH.). In inverting that text Chrys. has naturally to change 0-vp.wdo-xet and ffvyxalpci into xa'P" aI>d irdirxei respectively.

17. aveTXev] 'answered? 'Avatpttv is technically used of oracular responses. For the reading see critical note.
ib. XPW*>'] Cp. ad Theodorum lapsuni II 39 D 6 Bitot...
xpVf.09. 19. d7ra\Xd"y. w. ^{.] 'deceive
yourself no longer': lit. 'cease at length being deceived.'
91. Ta toO 6.v8p.~\ 1 Cor. ii ir, referred to already in ii 2.

76

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. XIV

dv6pd>irov to bv ev avra. 268. "Oti yap ical r)fid<; outov? ical tovs eXofievovs /carayeXdo-TOw; av etroiijaa/iev, twutt)v Se^dfievot rrjv dp^rjv, Kal fierd ttoXX^? rfj<; %r)p.!,a<; els TavTijv av etravrjXOofiev tov /St'ov rrjv KardcrTaaiv iv y ical 5 vvv i<r/Aev, el ical p.r) -irporepov, dXXa vvv <re tovtois olfiat TrerreiKevai tois prj/j,acriv. 269. OvSe yap ftaa/cavia fiovov, aXXa iroXXm icai Tfjf ftaaicavLas acj)oSpoTepov 17 Trj<; "PXV'* ravTiji; eTriOv/Mia, Toi>? ttoXXow oirXl^eiv eicoOe Kara tov ravTijv eypvTos. 270. Kal KaQdtrep 01 <f>iXdpyvpoi t&v 10 iraiSav fiapvvovrat to t&v iraTepcov yrjpas, ovtco Kal tovtcov rives, orav ihoao-iv els fiaicpbv iraparadeiaav rrjv lepcoavvrjv "xpbvov, i-neiZr) dveXelv ovk eiiayei, irapaXvcrai, 07rev8ov<Tiv ainbv rfj'i dpxfjs, irdvres dvT iicelvov yevecrOai eiriOvfiovvres, Kal et? eavTov e/cacrro? fierairecrelaOai, ttjv 15 dp)(T)v Trpoab'oKwvTes. XV. 271. BovXei o~oi Kal erepov eVtSet^w ravrrji; tt)? fid^rji; elSot, fivpicov e/j,TreTrXr)o~/ievov KtvSvvcov ; X9t, hr) Kal SiaKvyjrov «'? ra? BrifioreXels eoprd';, iv al<; fidXio-ra t&v eKKXricriao'TiK&p dpy&v rd<; aipecreis iroieiadai vo/iov Kal TOo-avTais o\frei KaTi)yopiai<; tov 20 lepea fiaXXofievov octov t&v dpj(Ofiev(ov to TrXfjOos ear*. 272. Havre? yap ol Sovvai tcvptcu tt)v ti/jltjv et? iroXXd TOTe o-%i£ovTai fieprj, ical ovre 77730? aWr/Xou?, ot/re irpbs avTov tov Xa%6vra rr)v itno-Koirr)v, to t&v ·jrpea-ffvrepcov crvviSpiov ofioyvasfiovovv 1801 rt? av, a\\' e/cacrro? KaO' 25 eavTov earrjKaatv, 6 fiev tovtov, 6 Se eKelvov aipov/ievos.

I to ev avrtti yz vulg || 9 tpikapxoi y' vulg || 10 tgj rtav Trarepuv 7770a Flz || 1 1 Trapadodeiaav by*z iraparadevra tov ttjs LepwffWTjs XP0V0V °\iv II 21 oijol Kvpioi dovvat c

I . thi ydp] This depends on TtweiKivai at the end of the sentence.
II. irapaTa$e'!o-av"\ ' prolonged' (Taparelvu).
XV'. Greatpressure is of'ten brought to bear upon the bishop to induce him to advance persons for unworthy

reasons : and in the course of such intrigues the fitness of a candidate is often the very last consideration that occurs to these evil counsellors.
17. Sri/i. top.] 'public festivals' : when vacancies in ecclesiastical offices were rilled up : Introd. p. xxvii.

III. xv]

DE SACERDOTIO

77

273. To Be aiTiov, ovk et? ep TrdvTei; op&aip, eh o fiovov opdv e^prjv, tt;? tyv'^fl'S ttjv aperr/v, dXX' elal Kal erepai Trpo<j)dcrei<; ai ravTri<; irpoljepoi, t?}? ti/m}?. olov, 6 fiev, oti yivov? icrrl Xafnrpov, ijKpcvecrdeo, <f>rj(riv 6 Be, oti, ttXovtop Trepi/3ef3\rjTai ttoXvp, koI ovk av Beoiro rpi(pea0ai e« t&v 5 Trj<; e/cic\.r]o~£a5 irpoaohtov 6 Be, on irapd T&v e^Op&v T/vTOfioXrjo-e. Kal 6 fiev top ot/ceta)? 77-po? avTov BiaKei/Aevov, o Be top <yevei irpoo-rJKOPTa, 6 Be top KoXaKevovTa /xaXKov t&p aXXwp irpoTifidv airovBd^ovmv' eh &e top eTriTijBeiop oiBeh opdp ftovXeTai, ovSe ^f^? Tivd irouel- 10 o-0at, fBdcravov. 274. 'Ey& Be Toaovrov Bern Tavras rj<yeio-0ai t«? aiTia<; d^iomo-Tov; elvat, 777)0? tt)v t&v lepeeop BokijjMo-'iav, &>? /xrjBe ei ti? 7roXX^i' evXdfieiav eiriBei^aiTO, Ttjp ov jjbiKpbv rjfitv 7T/30? tt)v dp^rjp GWTeXovaav eKeivqp, firjBe tovtop dirb TavT7)<; ev9eto<; ejKplvetP ToXfidv, el /at) /ttera 15 t»)<? evXaffeias TroXXr)v Kal ttjv avveo-iv e^cav rv%ot. 275- Kat yap olBa iroXXoii^ eycb t&v tov airapra j^popop KadeipfjdpTcop eavToii<; Kal p-qo-Teiats BairavrjQepTwv, oti eo>? fiep ai/Toh fiopoi? elvau ifffjp Kal to, avT&p /j,epi/ivdv, rivBoKLfAovv irapd dea>, Kal Ka6' eKdo-Trjv rjfiipav eKeivrj 20

8 01 Se tov KoKax. a || 9 jiaXXoi'] ira\tv vulg || 17 aravra top XP0V0V z vulg

3. at t. 7rpAf. t. r.] ' which bestow this honour': cp. irpogevetv iii 11 (note). The reference is thought by some to be to the election of a bishop, and the words t6v XaxivTa t^v iinaKOTrliv are taken (as by Stephens) to mean 'the man who has won the prelacy, ' i.e. recently. But at vi 8 t6v Xaxovra t^v (TruTKOirfiv is used simply as ' the bishop,' without any hint of a recent election : cp. iv 9 tov SiSao-iceiv tous dXXovs \axbvra. It seems, moreover, from the words (v ah /idXiara ktX. above, that the reference is more general : viz. to the filling up by the bishop and the irpeafiOrepoi, acting in conjunction, of responsible posts

in the Church. 6. irapd, t&v 4x8  i/0r.] 'has
come over from the enemy' i.e. from paganism, or (as suggested to me by the present Bishop of Exeter) from the Arians (top ivavrluv in § 278 = the party of Paulinus). A.irofio\e?v in late Greek is often simply = ' to come ' ; cp. Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. 22 (p. 85 Srawley).
17. Kal yap oZSa] Chrys. had been led to modify the very favourable view which he took of monasticism in earlier works : Puechp. 257, Introd. p. xiii.
18. Sairav-ri.'] ' who have spent themselves,' i.e. have attenuated their frames.

78

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xv

TTpoaeTiQecrav ttj (piXoaocpiq, /tepo? ov (iiicpov eireihr) Se els to Tr\r)9o<; rfkOov ical ra? tS>v ttoXK&v dpM0la<; eiravop0ovv r)vayicdadr]crav, oi p,ev ovSe Ttjv dp%r)v rjpicecrav 777)09 ttjv TocravTrjv irpay/^areiav, oi 8e fSiacrdevre? eirifieivai, S rrjv Trporipav a/cpi&eiav ptyavTes, eavTov<; re etflpiaso-av ra p,iyio~Ta ical erepovs toctovtov covrjaav ovSiv. 276. 'AW ovBe ei Tt? rbv drravra ^povov dvdXcocrev ev rfj ea^drr) tjj? \eiTOvpyla<; rdget fievcov, ical el<s ea^arov fjXacre yr}pa<}, tovtov a7r\w? Std ttjv rfkuctav alSecrdevres eVi rrjv dpyrjv 10 olcrop,ev rrjv dvwrepw. ri yap, el ical p,erd rrjv rfkiiciav iiceivr/v dveiriTr)heio<i mv fiivoi ; 2JJ. K.al oi rrjv ·jro'Kidv
drifidcrai f3ov\6(ievo<}, ov8e vopoBermv rovs dirb x°P°v fiova^ovTwv tficovTas irdvTws dtrelpyecrdai tPj<; roiavTT)? eVto-Tacrwi? ravra elirov vvv (a-weftr) yap iroWoix; ical eg 15 iiceivrj^ ekdovTas ttji dyeXr/i, ets ravTTjv SiaXdfiyfrat rrjv e*PXVv) ' aXX' eicelvo Selgai cnrov8d%(ov, on el p/qre evkdfteia icaO' eavrrjv, fir/re yrjpas paicpbv, iicavd yevoiT av Selgai rbv KeKTr)p,evov lepcoo-vvr/s agiov ovra, o-^pKfj y av ai Trpoeipr/fievat irpotpdcreit; tovto epydaaivro. 278. Ot Be 20 ical erepas irpoo-riQeao-iv aT07ra>Tepa<?. ical yap oi p.ev, "va p.r) p,era t&v ivavrimv Tagtoaiv eavrovs, et? ttjv tow ickrjpov KaraXeyovrai rdgiv oi 8e Sid irovrjpiav, ical %va

4 01 Se [3ia<r0eVTes ttjv irporepav aapifiaap virofieivai., pt^/avres eavrovs efri/uai$Ji<ra.v kt\. y || 6 om roaoxnov z vulg || 10 rr\v avoiraroi f* || 20 xa\eTrurepas fy*z

I. 4>t.\offo<t>t<t] i.e. asceticism: cp. i 1 <pCKoao(j>lav (note).
4. wpayfiar.} ' responsibility? 8. ^Xoire] ' has pushed on,' 'gone on': cp. v 3 xpri...eh axplfieiav roiTd)v...i\rp\aK^vat twv Ka\&v. II. rijx wo\idv} 'grey hairs,' Lat.
cani (capilli) : i.e. old age. 12. aitb xopov/iov.'} The practice
of calling monks to discharge the duties of the ordinary clergy seems to have been begun in the East by Athanasius about 330: see DCB ' Athanasius,' for his relations with

Pachomius, the founder of the coenobitic order. For X'f'"3' troop, ' 'band,' cp. vi 4 tov XohtoO tuv Sai.Tvp.bvwv x°pov-
15. els Tavri)v kt\.~\ For exx. of eh with accus. = ^»' with dat. in N.T. Greek see Blass Gr. N.T. 39 (3).
It would also be possible to take eis with iXBivras, but the order of the words is against this,
1 8. ax°^V 7 &* KT^- ] ' would hardly be likely to effect this ' : cp. iv 1 a%o\-j ye ri/uv...Sw^<TeTai apKiaai.

III. xv]

DE SACERDOTIO

79

p.rj -irapotpOevTe? fieydXa epydo-tovrac nana. 279. *Apa yevoir dv ri tovtov irapavofuoTepov, orav dvdpanroi Iao%drjpol, teal fivpicov yiftovre? ica/ctov, Btd ravra Bepairevovrai, Bi a KoXd£eo~6ai eBei, Kal wv evexev fir/Be rov oi/Bov TT79 e'/c/cXrio-t'a? virepfiaLveiv e%pf}v, virep tovtwv kclI et<? rrjv 5 lepariKrjv avaffaLvovaiv dfjlav ; 280. "Et4 ovv fyrrfao/iev, elire fioi, rod deov rfj<; 6pyfj<; rr/v alriav, irpdyp.ara ot/Tw? ayia Kal (ppiKwBeo-Tara dvdpmiroK tok fiev irovTjpols, toi<; Be oi>Bevd<i allots Xvfialveo-dat, irape/)(ovTe<; ; orav yap oi fiev t&v firjBev avrols irpoo-TfKovrcov, oi Be rtov iroXXS 10 (iei£ova>v rij<} ol/eelas Bwdfiew; irpoo-rao-iav ifiirio-revddociv, ovBev Rvpiirov rrjv eKKKrjaiav Bia<pepeiv ttolovciv. 281. 'E-ycb Be irporepov t<£v e^codev ap%ovTa>v KareyeXwv, on ra<i t&v TifitSv Biavofias ovk airo t??<> aperrjs tij? ev reus yfrv%cu<;, dXX' dirb xpifjidrav Kal irXrjOovs erwv Kal 15 dv6pwirlvrfs iroiovvrai irpoo-Tao-Lw iirel Be rj/cova-a, on avTi) rj dXoyia Kal et? to r/fierepa eiaeKwfiaaev, ovk ed' o/ioiayq eiroiovfirjv to irpdjfia Beivov. 282. TV yap Qavfxa<ttov, dvOpdnrovi j3mdtikovs ical 80^779 tt}? irapd t&Ji> iroXXwv pwvra<; Kal j^prffiaTaiv evexa irdvra irpdrrovTas dfiaprdveiv 20 Toiavra, oirov ye oi irdvrwv dirrjXXd^dai irpoairoiovfievoi Tovrtov ovBev dfietvov etceivtov BtaKeivrai, dXX' virep twv ovpaviwv rov dymva e^oi/Te?, a>? trepl irXeOpcov 7775 f)

3 depairevunTai yz vulg || 4 rwv ovdiov c || 6 avafiaivwffw yz vulg || 10 raw ovSev outois cfyz | 13 KaraytXav cfy* || 15 airo raw xP7lfMTW'' vz vu'g II 16 eirei&rj i]Kov<ra y*z eTreiSrjirep TjKovaai \\ 18 evotov/JLijif'] riyovfiai y

2. Srav ... Bepaweioyrai] For Sto.ii with indicative cp. iii 18 Srav . . .airaiTeiTcu, and see Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii (ed. Hort-Mayor) Appendix B, Field on Homm. in Epp. Paul. Index s.v. Qepair. here = ' are
courted,' 'flattered.' 8. <ppiKU)S4ara,Ta] Cp. iii 4 0o-
jSe/jct Kal <t>puca54<rra.Ta (note). 12. Eiptrov] The strait between
Euboea and Boeotia, famous for its numerous tides, and hence a type of

human instability : cp. adv. oppugn. vit. monast. II 74 A Kaddirep 4v Evpiir<p r<f vapbvn fiitp tpepd/ievos.
13. t&v l(w0ei>'] Cp. rois t%w6tv i 4 (note).
17. elaeK&ficurev] i has invaded,'
like a band of turbulent revellers : cp. iii 17 p.vpla.1 elaeKibp.affai', v 8 tpu>s elffaai/xaac, and see Suicer s.v.
ai. iwov yc] ' seeing that.' 23. uis irepl kt\.] 'as though they had to decide {merely) about portions

80

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xv

erkpov Ttvo? toiovtov TJ79 /3ov\r)<; avTol? jrpoKeifievr}';, a7r\eo? dvdpcoTrov; dyeXalovs X<x/3<We? icpicrTacri irpdyp^acrt, TotouTot?, virep wv teal rrjv eavTov /cevwcrai Bo^av, ical dvOpmirot yevecrdai, ical BovXov fiopcprjv \afieiv, ical 5 iixTTTvaOrjvai, teal paTriardrjvai, ical ddvarov tov eirovelBi(ttov dirodavelv ov TrapyrijcraTo 6 fiovoyevrj? tov deov 7rai? ; 283. Kat ovBe p-e^pi tovtwv lo-ravrai p,6vov, dXXd ical erepa irpoartdeacriv droTrwrepa. ov yap tovs dva^lovf eyicpivoven p,6vov, d~X~kd ical tov<; eiriTrj&ebovs eicj3dWovcnv. 10 Sairep yap Beov d/MporipaOev Xvfirfvacrdat, rrj<; iicickr)o-ia<; tt)v dacpdXeiav, rj &o~irep ovk apKovat)^ t?)? irpo-rkpat Trpo<pdcrea)$ itc/cavcrai tov Oeov tt)v opyrjv, ovtco ttjv Bevrepav avvrjyfrav, ov-ft tJttov ovaav %aXeiri]v' ical yap e£ XaTjt 01/j.ai elvai Beivov, to Te tov? -%pr)o-lp,ov<; direlpyeiv ical to 15 Toil? d-^peiov; eicrmOelv ical tovto Br) yLverai, Xva pvi)Bap.66ev irapapbvOiav evpelv p.r)Be dvairvevcrai Bvvrjdfj tov XpicrTov to vroLfiviov. 284. TavTa ov fivpiwv a%ia o-icr)Tn5)v ; TavTa ov yeivv7]<s_ a<f>oBpoTepa<;, oil TavTi)<; p,6vov t?)? r)7rei\,r)p,ein)<; r)p,lv; dXX' ofia><; dve%eTai, ical 20 (j>epei to. Tocravra icaicd 6 fir) /3ou\o/i6i/o? tov OdvaTov tov dp,apT(o\ov, a>? to iiricrTpkrifai avTov ical %r}v. 7rw? dv Til avTov Tr/v (piXavOpcovlav 0avp,daeie ; 7ra>? dv eKirXayelr) tov eXeov ; oi tov X.pio~Tov to, tov XpiaTov Biacpdeipovcrtv e^Op&v ical iroXefiicov paXXov 6 Be dyados

6 axo0cu'eu'] + 8ia ttjs (rapxoi cy' vulg || 7 pexP1 Tovray] + (kov) ovtids yz + ouToi vulg || 16 evprj fy*z || 17 Tavra] + ovv y vulg || 21 km tus ok z vulg

of land.' The wbASpov, in its strict sense as a measure of land, contained 10,000 square feet.
2. a7r\us] Cp. i 4, iii 10. ii. dyeXalovs] ('belonging to the ay4\r) or herd,' i.e.) 'common,' 'vulgar.' 3. KevQaai /crX.] Phil, ii 7, where see Lightfoot.

7. otiSe /^XP1 ktX.] Cp. ii 1 oix (trrri M^PW" toUtov (note).
10. w<nrep 7. 8.] ' as though it were incumbent upon them.'
18. avc^Tr-rax] ' thunderbolts.' 20. 6 /iii |3oi/X. ktX.] Ezek. xviii 23, xxxiii n. 21. irws &v tls ktX.] 'how can one {sufficiently) admire ? '

III. XV]

DE SACERDOTIO

81

ert 'Xprjo-Teverai, Kal et? fierdvoiav KaXei. 285. A6%a crol, Kvpie, Bo^a croL iroat]^ (f>iXav8pco7r[a<; afjvaaos irapd aol; 7JW77? avefjticaida<; ttXouto?; 01, Bid to ovofia to crbv, ii; evTeXwv Kal drifuov evrifioi Kal TrepifiXeTTTot yeyovoTev, t{) Tip-fi Kara tov T6Tt/tiy/coTO? Ke%pr)VTai, ical 5 ToXp,u>ai to, aTo\p,T}Ta, Kal ivvfipL^ovo-iv ei? to, dyia, rov? o"7rouSatou9 dir(odovfj,evoi ical iicf3aWovTe<}, iva ev rjpe/ua iroXXj), ical fiera, ahela<t riy? ecr^aTT)'}, 01 irovrjpol iravra ocratrep av edeXcocriv avarpeiraxri. 286. Kal tovtov Be tov Beivov ra<! atVt'a.? el OeXeis p-adelv, ojtiota? Tat? irpo- 10 repait evptfcreis. ttjv p.ev yap pit,av Kal (a>? av ti? eXiroi) p.r)repa piav e^ovcri, Ttfp jSaaicavLav aiiTal Be oil fiius elo-iv t8ea?, dXXd Btecrrijicao'iv. 287. 'O p,ev yap, iireiBrj veos eo-rlv, eK/3aXXecr0co, (prjcriv 6 Be, eVetSr) KoXaKeveiv ovk olBev o Be, eTreiBr) tw Belvi wpoo-eKpovo-ev ical 6 (lev, 15 Xva fit) 6 Becva XvTrrjrai, tov p,ev vtt ax/TOv Bodevra diroBoicip,ao-devTa, tovtov Be eyiceicpipjvov op&v 6 Be, eireiBi) XprjaTos io~Ti Kal e7^tel/07?· 6 Be, eireiBr) toi? dp,apTavovcri ->
(po/3epo<}' 6 Be, Bt dXXrjv alrlav TotavTijv' ovBe yap airopovai irpofydtremv, oaoav av edeXcoaiv. dXXd Kal to 20 irXrjdo<i tmv ovtiov eo~Tiv at/Tot? aiTiao-dai, OTav firjBev eywaiv eTepov Kal to fir) Beiv dOpoeoi ei? Tavrr/v dvdyecrdai ttjv Tip/r)v, dXX i)pefia Kal KaTa fiiKpov Kal erepas,

2 woai) z vulg || 3 xoffos az vulg || 7 epij/xia c || n m av enrols y* || 21 aiTiaaaadai cf || 22 aXXa km to /af Sew y vulg || aye<r$ai yz vulg

1. xPW«5eTMi] ('acts the part of the jtpT/ffTos,' i.e.) 'shews his kindness.' Cp. for the form of the word AvmScieaBai (iii 16), tovi)peiWflai (v 6), and see Lightfoot on Phil, ii 30. For the general sense of the passage cp. Rom. ii 4 t6 Xfni&Tbv rod deov els iict6.voi6.v <re otyei.
16. So0ivTa\ ' put forward? 'recommended.'
20. to r\rj$os t&v ovti>>v"\ ' the number of existing (bishops) ' : cp.

t?s oftr?;s (sc. liOvtuas) to ttXAv iii 16. The velus interpres likewise renders the words by ' multitudinem clericorum.' Some editors, however (e.g. Hughes, Leo), translate: 'the abundance of his resources ' (opum copiam). This can hardly be right. Wealth may indeed procure the preferment of some unworthy person (see the beginning of this chapter): but it can scarcely be also adduced as a reason for rejecting one who was otherwise suitable.

N. C.

6

82

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xv

ocra<; av ftovXcovTai, hvvaivT av alnat eipetv. 288. 'Eyw Se ere jjSe'w? evravOa iprjcrop.ai, ri ovv Bel tov eiricrKoirov irotelv to<tovtoi<; fiayofievov irvevfiacri, ; 7r<w9 7T/30? Tocravra (TTrjcrerai KVfiara ; 7ra>9 irdcra<i ravra<; dirmcreTai to? 5 7TjOOcr/3o\a5 ; 289. *Az> /iev <ya/3 opda Xoyicrp,a> to irpaypa Siadfjrai, e%0pol /cat iroXep.101, ical avrm ical toI<; alpedelcriv Hiravres' ical 7rpo? (f>iXoveiici,av tt)v etcelvov irpamovcnv airavTa, ardcrei'i ko.8' eKacrTrjv ififtdXXovTes Trjv r)p,epav, ical cnc(o/j,fj,aTa fivpia toIs alpedelcriv eiriTi8evre<i, ea>? av rj 10 TovTovt eic(3a\(ocnv tj tovs avrebv elcraydycocriv. Kat yi/yverai irapaifKricnov, olov av el rt? icvf3epvrJTri<; evBov ev tj/ vqi Ty irXeovcrr) 7retp<XTa? e%ot crvfiirXeovTas, ical avT<S ical toi? vavrai<} ical T049 eiriftdrais ffwe^w? ical lead' eicdcrT'qv e-mftovXevovTas wpav. 290. *Av Be rr/v irpbs eiceLvovs 15 ")(dpiv irpoTipyqarj rrj<; uvtov aa)Tripia<;, Be%d/j.evo<i ov? ovk eBei, eget p.ev tov 6ebv dvr eiceivmv e^Opov, ov tL yevot,T av %aXeir<ioTepov ; ical to 71730? exeivov; Be avrw BvcncoXmrepov r) irporepov BiaicelcreTai, iravrcov crvpmpaTTOVTmv dXXr)Xot,<;, ical tovtw p.aXXov lo-)(yp&v ytyvop,eva>v. Sairep 20 yap dypicov dvep,(ov ef ivavrias Trpoa-jreaovrav to Tea)? fjav^d^ov TreXayo<> fiatveTai eijai<f>vT)s ical Kopvcpovrai, ical tov? ep,TrXeovTa<; airoXXvaiv ovtco ical rj t»J? e/cicXrjcnas yaXrjvq, Befjapevr) <p6opea<; dvOpwirow;, £dXr)<; ical vavayicov TrXrjpoinai, ttoXXcov. XVI. 291. 'Kvvorjcrov ovv, oirolov 25 Tiva elvai xpr) tov 77730? toctovtov p,eXXovTa dvOe^eiv yeip,5)va, ical TOcravTa K<oXvp.aTa tSdv tcoivy crvp.<pepovT(ov

6 Siaflij y vulg II 1 1 ciri ttj vyi y II 19 tovtwv z vulg || 20 TrpoaireaovTiav"] + aXX7jXois vulg || 23 <p8opet$b\z <p$opovsy vulg || 24 eyvorjcov ovv kt\.] haec verba citat Suidas s.v. 'lwivvr/i

2. tov iirloKoirov\ This shews clearly that it was the episcopate from which Chrys. had fled : see on i 3 {UpweivTis).
7. 7rp4s 0i\o>>.] 'with a feeling of hostility to him' (sc. the bishop).
23. ipBopias] 'wicked.' The word

<p8ope<5s is usually a substantive, ' seducer.'
XVI. Other difficulties which confront the bishop are now described: e.g. the care of the widows, and the superintendence of the diocesan finances.

III. xvi]

DE SACERDOTIO

83

Biadrjcreiv KaXw<;. 292. Kal yap Kal crefivbv teal drvcpov,

Kal (poffepbv teal irpoarivr], Kal dp^iKov Kal /eoivaivi/cbv, Kal

dSeicacrTov /cat depairevriKov, Kal rwirewov Kal dBovXcoTov,

Kal o~<po8pbv Kal ijfiepov elvai Bel, "va 717309 airavra Tavra

euKoXw? fidxeadai Bvvrjrai, Kal tov eTrirrjBeiov fj,erd ttoX- 5

A.?)? t??9 ii;ov(ria<;, Kav arravTes avrnrlirraio-i, rrapdyeiv, Kal

tov ov tolovtov fierd rrj<; avrfj<; e'fouo-ia?, Kav airavTe<s

avpvKvkacn, (irj TrpocriecrOai, dXX' els ev fibvov opdv, rr)?

eKKkr}aLa<; rrjv olKoBofirjv, Kal /j,r)Bev 777309 dtre^deiav r)

XaPtv Troieiv.

10

293. ''Apd croi BoKovf&ev ewcoTa>9 irapyTrjcrOat, tov rrpd-

yiMaros tovtov tt)v BiaKoviav; Kairoi ye ovttco rrdvra

Bir\XQov 777309 o~e, e%<» yap Kal erepa Xeyeiv. dXXa fir)

d7T0Kd/j,T)$ dv8pb<; <j>[Xov Kal yvrjaiov ftovXofievov ae ireLdeiv,

inrep dov iyKaXeis, dve^ofievo^. oiBe yap 777309 ttjv diro- 15

Xoy'iav col rr)v inrep r)fj,av Tavra ^prjo-ifid iari fiovov,

dXXa. Kal 777309 aiirrjv tov Trpdy/Aaros ttjv BioiKrfo-iv Ta^a

oil fUKpbv o-vfiftaXeirai KepBos. 294. Kat yap dvayKalov

tov fieXXovra eirl Tavrrjv ep^ecdai tov /Stow ttjv oBov,

irporepov diravra Biepevvr/o-dfievov KaX&s, ovrto<} dyjraadai 20

rr)<; BtaKoviat. t'l Br\TTOTe; oti el Kal p.r)8ev aXXo, to yovv

fj,r) ^evorraffelv, r)vuKa av Tavra irpoamrrrr), irepiearai

irdvra elBort crac^w?. 295. BouXet ovv eirl rrjv twv yrip&v

5 tov TriT7}Seiov] + Set y vulg |] 6 avTiirnrToxri] e7r«n7o"wa"i c +tw toiovtwj || 8 tt)» eKKkT)<natrTwriv oi.KoSoiJ.-qv z vulg || 16 eorai cfyz || 22 wepuo-rai] + tw y vulg || 23 eidevat oa<pws z || rrjv xqpav y vulg

1. <rep.v6v kt\.] The qualities are contrasted in pairs : ' dignified yet modest ' etc.
3. &54k. kt\.~\ ' impartial yet courteous.'1 'ASck. is from tecifw, 'to bribe.' Cp. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. II 58 c dSexdorois Kpirats.
6. wapdyeiv] ' to promote,1 ''prefer ' : cp. irap-qyayov ii 7 (note).
21. to yovv /iTj {....xe/«.] 'at any rate he will have the advantage of

not being surprised.' Sfvoir. occurs in Plutarch.
23. rOjv xtp&v} These were the widows regularly maintained at the expense of the Church (cp. 1 Tim. v 16); their names were entered on a list kept for that purpose (see 4yyp6.<peo6a.L below).
In Antioch, where there were about 100,000 Christians, the widows and virgins together numbered 3000 :

84

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xvi

- irpoaraaiav icofiev irpoTepov, rj ttjv t&v irapOevav Kt)Befioviav, rj tov Si/cacmicov fiepov; ttjv Bvo-^epetav ; ical yap

e'<£' eKcUrrov tovtoov Std<popo<; 77 (ppovrU, Kal t^? (ppovrLBos

fiei^mv 0 <f)6po<i. 296. Kal irp&rop, Xva wirb tov t£>v

5 aXXwv evreXearepov Bokovvtos elvai Troi,r)o-<i)fieda ttjv apyr)v, 17 t&v %r)p&P depaireia BoKel p,ev fie^pi r»?? tS>v

j^p7)fidr(ov 8a7rdvr)$ rot? iirifieXovfj.evois ainmv irapeyetv

(ppovTiSa,' to Be 011 toiovtov io~Tiv, dXXa iroXXij^ Bel

icdvTavda r»7? e^eTotreo)?, OTav avTas KaraXeyeiv Bey

10 297- &>? T0 7e ffwXw? Kal to? 6TV)(ev aura? eyypd<peo~0ai

fivpLa elpydaaTO Beiva. tcai yap o'ikov; Bie<f>8eipav Kal

ydfiov<i Bieairaaav, Kal eVt «\o7rat? 7ro\\a/a? Kal Karri}Xelai? Kal eTepa roiavTa da-)(r)fjbovovo-av edXooo-av. 298. To

Se Ta? Toiavras dnro t&v Trj<i eKK\r)aia<; Tpetpecrdai XPV~

15 p,aTcov Kal izapd Qeov Tipcoplav Kal trapd dvdpioirav (pepet. ttjv eaydr^v KaTayvtuaiv, Kai tov; ev iroielv /3ovXop.evovs

oKvrjpoTepow; Kadiarqai. ti? yap av eXoiTo Trore, a tS XptcrrcS Trpoo-eTdyQi) Bovvai 'Xprjp.aTa, ravra dvaXLo-Keiv

et? Tou? to tov ~2Lpio-TOx> BiafidXXovTas ovop,a ; 299. Aid

20 Tavra iroXXrjv Bel Kal aKpiftrj iroielo-Qai, rfjv e^eTao-iv, ware firj p,6vov ra? elpr)fieva<; dXXa firjBe Tas eavral<i

eirapKelv Bwajievas tijp t&v dBvvaTwv Xvfiaiveo-0ai rpdtre^av. 3°°- Me-ra Be rrjv e^eTaacv TavTtjv eTepa BiaBe-

5 TronjaupLev fyz || 7 xa/Mxe'"] + TV z vulg || 8 Setrai vulg || 13 erepot? toiovtois vulg || 15 irapa av8pwirois fy.|| l"J <rK\T)porepovs y* || 21 ws p.t) vulg || tos eipij/tecas] toutos z || 22 apxeiv vulg

see Puech pp. 240 sqq. Cp. also Lightfoot on Ign. Smyrn. 6, 13 (II i 304, 322).
1. ran irap9(vwv~\ i.e. those who had bound themselves by vows of chastity : see Chrysostom's treatise de virginitate. The first notices of separate houses for those who had taken such vows occur in the middle of the fourth century : e.g. Ambrose de virg. i 10. As a rule, however, the virgins did not live in convents, but in their own homes: DCA

'Virgins.' 2. SiKa<m.Kou] See c. 18 below. 6. pAxpi.-.Tra-p. (pp.'] 'to cause
no more anxiety than (that involved) in the spending of money. '
9. KaraXtyeiv] Cp. 1 Tim. v 9. 12. KairtjXdais] ' immoral trades,* e.g. that of the irpoayaybt : cp. Homni. in 1 Cor. 275 A. 19. -oi>s Jio/3d\X.] 'those whobring slander upon': Field Homm. in Matt. 191 B.

III. ]

 3000

85

 '  ,      ,   ,    ) .  <      ,  ,        ,    ,     - 5 ,    . 3· *   ,     ,                    ,         (         ,    ),         .         , ,          15 ·. 3°2·         ,

   ,         {   )   ,   ,       ,      2 '.       ,      ,      . 3°3·     ,   ,  ,       ,    )> 25       ,     . 3°4·      ,

   ! ( || 6 .5  ||  ]     1§ ||   ] +   £ || 1 2     II 13       ^ II 15  *'   || 2   ||   

. ] ' .' 3· .] ' ]5 ' : .  9· 5- (·  .] .  3     · .

<).   . .] ('   ') '/ / (     .'
^7· ^" -.~\ ]\>5 5  5&1,    .

86

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xvi

et? T6 to <f>i\oKpBe<; Kal to inrepoTTTiicov rfj<; dvOpwirivrfi <f>vo~e(o<! aTTiScbv, Kal tt)<; trevia<s rr)v <pvcriv Kara/xaOaJv Beivr/v ovaav Kal rrjv yevvaiOTarr/v yjri%r)v KaTaftaXeiv, Kal ireio-ai irepl t5)v avTwv avato-^WTeiv TroXXaKis, iva fir) rt? 5 alTOVfievo<; Trap' avrwv opyl^r/Tai, firjBe tu> crvve^el rfj<: ivrev^ew; irapo^vvdeh iroXefiio<; 6 f3oij6eiv 6<peiXcov yivr/Tai, Trapa<TK6va£ei irpoorjvTJ re avrov Kal evirpoaiTov elvai ra Beofievw, Xeywv' KXlvov 7tt&)^c5 aXvirax} to o5? crov, Kal aTTOKpidrjTi, avr<£ ev TrpaoTr/Ti elprjviKa. Kal tov irapoio %vvovTa a<£et?, ti yap av Tt? tu> Keifievw Xeyoi ; t«3 Bvvafievcp rrjv eKeivov <f>epeiv daOeveiav BiaXeyerai, trapaKaXaiv T(S re rjfiepw Try? cr^ea)? Kal rfj rwv Xoycov TrpaoTrjTt irpo rfj<; Boo-eas avrov dvopOovv. 305. *Av Be Tt? rd fiev eKeiveov fir) Xafi/3dvr/, fivpiois Be ai/Ta? oveiBeai 7repi0dXXrj, 15 Kal vftpi^r), Kal Trapo^vvrjrai Kar avrmv oil fiovov ovk eTreKoiKptae rr)v d-iro TT7? ·n-ei'ia? ddvfiiav r<£ Bovvai, aXXd Kal fiel^ov Tat? XotSoptat? elpydaaro to Beivov. 306. Kav yap Xiav dvaia^vvreiv j3ia£tovTai Bid Tr)v tt)? yao-rp6<; avdyKTjv, dXX ofi<o<; aXyovaiv Trl rfj j3ia Taiirrj. orav ovv 20 Bid fiev to toO Xifiov 8eo? irpoaaiTelv dvayKa^covrat, Bid Be to irpoo-aireiv dvaiBevecr&ai, Bid Be to dvaiBeveo-dai irdXiv vfipL%v>VTai, TroiKiKrj tis Kal ttoXvv <pepovaa tov £6<f>op iirl Trjv ^vyrjv exeivcov KaTao-Kijirrei tjJ? ddv/iias r] Bvva/u,K. 307. Kal Bel tov tovtwv eirifieXovfievov iirl 25 Toaoiirov eivai fiaKp60vfiov, a>? fir) fiovov avTals fir) irXeo-

6 yerqTcu yz vulg || 14 KaraKaii^avi) y || 16 rw /m? 8ovvtu y || 20 Sia Se to TrpoaaiTeiv, tw aecuo. irahtv vjBpifavTCU y

3. Seivrjv . . . KaTajS.] * skilled in overthrowing': cp. v 4 (ppovrlScs 8eu>al KaTapaKeiv if/vxys Stivapuv.
6. ivreii;.] ' entreaty. ' 8. nXirov] Ecclus. iv 8, cited from memory. Tischendorf-Nestle omit AMiruis, and give the last words thus : Kal iiroKp. airrf cl/n)i>. iv wpavTrrn.

10. r*p /retju&'y] ' the fallen.' 13. t4 /iiv.../iij Xa^.] 'though he does not take their goods, yet encompasses them ' etc. 18. jSidf. ...dvdyKijv'i part of a hexameter : see on 0 ras &tAvtwv kt\. ii 1. 2 1 . &vcu8e6e<r8at] Cp. x/"7^rei)erax iii 15 (note).

III. xvi]

DE SACERDOTIO

8j

vd^eiv tt)v d0v/u.iav Tot? aryavaicTijcrecnv, dXXd Kai T179 overt)? to 7rXeoi' Koi/xi^eiv Sid T179 TrapaKXr}o-eax;. mo-irep yap i/celvo<; 6 v/3pio-0el<; ev TroXXfi irepiovaia, ovk alcrOdveTai TJ79 airo tSv Xprj/J.aTcov a)<peXeia<;, Sid ttjv dird ttj<; vftpeax; TrXrjyrjv ovtcos outo? o trpoarjvrj Xoyov aKOvaat;, 5 Kai /jiera Trapa,K\r)o~ea><; to SiSo/xevov Se^dfievo?, ydvvrai irXeov Kai %aipei, Kai SnrXovv avra> to So0ev Tq3 Tpoira yiyveTai. 308. Kat TavTa ovk dir efiavTov, aXX' air eKeivov tov to irpoTepa vrapaiveaavTOS <f>0iyyofiar TeKvov yap, <fyr)o-ip, ev dyaOoi<; firj Sax; fidtfiov, Kai ev irdar] Soaei 10 Xvirrjv Xoyov. ovyt Kavo~a>va avairavaei Spoao<; ; ovt<o Kpeiaaov \0y05 7} S6ai<;. ISov ydp X.670? iirep Sofia dyadov, Kai dfiipoTepa trapa dvSpl Ke%apiTa>fievcp. 309. Ovk eTrieiKTJ Se fiovov Kai dve^iKaKov tov tovtwv irpoo-Tdtt)v, dXXd Kai oiKovofiiKov ov% rjTTOv elvai XPV' <*>'> *&v 15 tovto airr), irdXiv els Trjv iarjv irepi'io-raTai frfiiav Ta twv irevr/rcov yj>r)p,aTa. 310. "JiSr) ydp ti? TavTtjv irio~Tev0els ttjv SiaKoviav, Kai %pvo-bv avvayayatv ttoXvv, ai/TO? fiev ov KaTe<f>ayev, dXX' oiiSe et? tow Seo/j,evov<;, irXrjv oXiyatv, dvdXao-e, to Be irXeov KaTopv^a? i<f)vXaTTev, et»? ov xaipo? 20 ^a\e7ro9 eVto-Ta? trapeSuKev avrd Tais t&v ivavTicov %epo-L 311. IloWr}? ovv Set TT79 trpofir)0eia<;, a>? /ir/re
irXeovd^eiv /iijTe eXXeiireiv tt}? eKKXijo-ias rrjv nrepiovaiav dXXd irdvTa fiev o-Kopiri%eiv Ta^ew? Tot? Seop,evois Ta iropi^ofieva, ev Se Tats twi> dp^ofievwv Trpoaipeaeari avvd- 25

3 om ev iroXXi; weptovaia yz || 5 ovtw nai ovros y vulg || 7 anTM to SoOev y vulg [| II Xoyou] + Tovripov a \oyaiv vulg || 15 rn.Kovop.iav fly*z || 22 om us c

1. 7-77S o&arjs] sc. ddufilas : cp. to t\i)$os tQv ovtwv iii 15 (note).
3. iv troWrj irepi.] * with great abundance,' ' having enough and to spare': cp. Ik irepiovcrlas i 4 (note).
9. rixvov] Ecclus. xviii 15 -- 17. The LXX text as given by Nestle has Xo7«k (for X070U), xpetaaav, and ovk £5oi> X6705. For KexapiTwpJvip, 'en-

dowed with graces' see Lightfoot Notes on Epp. of St Paul p. 315.
24. wdvra p.. <fk. t.] For the enmity which Chrys. aroused at Constantinople by carrying out this principle see Puech p. 238 : and for the attitude of Chrys. towards riches and the rich, Puech pp. 66 sqq.
25. iv Si rah ktX.] ' heap up the

88

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xvi

yew t»7? eKK\rj<ri,a<s tov<; 6r)cravpoii<;. 312. Ta? Be rmv Ijevcov v7ro8o^a?, ical ' T05 tcbv acrdevovvTwv 6epaireia<;, ir6crr)<; /iev oi'et BelaOai yprjfiaTCOV Bairdvr)<;, 7r6o~r)<; Be rr/? t&)2' i-7Ti<TTaTovvTmv <i/cpif3eia<; T6 /cat o~vveo~ea)s ; teal yap 5 T775 elprjfievT)? ava\d><rea><} rainrjv r/TTOva fiev ovBap,6i)<;, TroXXaKit Be teal p,ei^ova elvai dvdyicr)' ko\ tov eiricrTarovvra TTopicrTiKov riva fier euXa/3et'a? teal cfrpovijaecos, 005 ·jrapaaiceva^etv icai qbiXoTtfiws tail dXv7rco<i BiBovai, rov<i KeKTT)fievov<; rd Trap' avr&v, 'iva fir) rr}? twv dcrdevovvTwv 10 avairavaew; trpovowv Ta? rmv Trapeyovrtov ttX^tttj yjrv%d<;. 3 1 3. Tr)v Be jxaKpoQvpiav ical ttjv cnrovBrjv ttoXv irXeiova ivravOa eirbBeiKwaOai Bel. Bvcrdpecnov yap Trots oi vocrovvTes xpijfia ical paQvfxov icav p.r) ttoXXt) travTaypdev ela<f>epr)Tai a/cpifteia /cat cf>povTi<}, apicel ical to fju/cpov 15 iiceivo 7rapo<f>6ev fieydXa epydcracrOat, tc5 voctovvti, icaicd. XVII. 314. 'E7rt 8e Tr}<; twv irapOevutv eVt/ieXeta? rocrovtco fiet^cov 6 (po/3o<;, Scrip ical to tcrfj/xa TifiuoTepov, ical f3acriXiica>Tepa avrr) twv aXXcov r) dyeXr}' (rjBr) yap ical e« tov T&v ayiaiv tovtcov X°P°v pvpiat, fivpiosv yefiovcrai 20 Kaicwv elcreicwp,ao-av) fiel^ov Be ivTavOa to TrevOos. 315. Kat Kaddirep ovk Xaov Kopr/v re eXevdepav ical rrjv TavTT)<; Oepdiraivav d/iapTeiv, ovtcos ovBe irapOevov ical yqpav. Tal<; p,kv yap ical Xripelv ical XoiBopetaOai Trpo<; dXXi]Xa<; ical KoXaiceveiv ical dvaicryvvTelv ical -wavTayov 25 cpaLveadat, ical to vepilevai ttjv dyopav yeyovev dBidcf>opov r) Be irapOevos eirl p.el%ocnv direBvcraTO, ical Tr)v dvcoTaTO)

1 tup vouovvtuv c II 1 r npoOv/uav y'z vulg || n-oXXw xXeiora z vulg || 15 eKt irapotp'dev ac franc

treasures of the Church in the shape of the sentiments of the laity. %
1. ^tvwv i)jro8ox<is] See Puech pp. 82, 239.
12. Svadp. y. r.~\ a reminiscence of Eurip. Orestes 232 Svadpearov oi voaovvres iiropias thro : cp. to Svadpcarov twv dppojtsroijVTUv l 5.
XVII. The care of the virgins.

16. irapBtvuv] See on iii 16. 18. /3a<riXi/c....^ £7.] 'this is a more princely band than the others' 20. elaeic.] Cp. elaeKw/Murcv iii 15 (note), 25. yiyovtv ddid<p.] Of course Chrys. is not speaking seriously. 26. ^jri Me'f* dired.'] 'has prepared herselffor a greater struggle ' :

III. xvn]

DE SACERDOTIO

89

<pi\o(7o<f>i,av etyXaxre, Kal ttjv t<Sv dyyeXoov iroXiTeiav Bei^at eVt 7*79 eTrayyeXXeTai, Kal fiera ttj<{ oapicos ravTrji to, tcov acrcofiaTtov avrfj Bvvap,ea>v Karopdwaai irpoKeiTaf Kal ovTe TrpooSovf irepiTTa<; iroieladai, Kal TroXXd^ Bel, ovre ptffiaTa avrrj <f>Oiyyeo-0ai elicr} Kal fidrrjv e<f>etrai, XoiBopia? 5 Be Kal Ko\aKela<; oiiBe tovvo/ao, elBevat, XPV- 3 1 6. Aid tovto do~<paXeo~TaTi)<i <f>vXaKf}$, Kal irXeiovo<; Seirat tt)? <rvfifia%ia<;. 6 re yap rrjs dyuoavvr)<; i%0pd<; del Kal jjuaXXov airaif e<f>eo-T7)Ke Kal TrpocreBpevet, Karairieiv eroiju.09, el irov Ti? e^oXurdrjaeie Kal KarairiaoL, dvOpaoirmv teio oi eTriftovXevovTes iroXXol, Kal fierd tovtcov dtrdvTcov 7) T179 <f>vaeco<; fiavia' Kal ·717309 BnrXovv rov iroXefiov t] irapdTa£i? avrrj, rov p.ev e^coOev irpoo-fiaXXovra, tov Be eacoOev evo'xXovvTa. 317- Ata ravra too yovv etrio'TaTovvTi 7roXu? fiev 6 <?j6/3o9, fieu^iov Be 0 KivBvvos, Kal rj oSvvr}, eX tc 15 twv d/3ovXr)Tmv (b p,t) yevoiTo) avfi^airf irork. 3 1 8. Et yap irarpl dvydrrjp diroKpv<fro<; dypvirvia, Kal tj fiepifiva avTTjs d<f>i(TTa vttvov, ottov irepl rov crreipcoOfjvai t) irapaKfidaai. 77 fiicnj0f}vai toctovtov Beo<;, tl Treiaerai 6 tovtcov fiev ovBev, erepa Be tovtcov iroXXtp p,el%ova fiept/iv&p ; ov 20 yap dvr)p evTavda 6 dOeTovfievos, dXX' avTo<i 6 Xpta-roV oiBe /A6T£/w oveiBcov 17 o-Telpmo-iq, aXX* et? a7r<oX.etaj/ 1^1^779

2 ciri T17S yt)S z vulg || 4 Kat oire--Set] Kat ov Set ovre-- jroXXas y vulg || 5 avnjv y' || (i/i!fi(u a franc || 12 Kat air\ws ttbos SttrXovv vulg || 13 e<rw0ev'] evSotiev acf || 14 70W] rovrav acf vet int. (talibus) || 15 ei irore 7-1 vulg

the metaphor in direJ. is from an athlete stripping for exercise : adv. oppugn, vit. monast. II 58 c.
1. <pi\oatxj>iav\ Cp. <pi\o<ro<plav i 1 (note).
7. iirayyiWerat] ' professes1 : cp. I Tim. ii 10.
id. Hera rijs <rap(cot t.] 'besides this flesh.' Field's Index II to Homm. in Matt. s.v. furi gives other exx. of this meaning.
8. ore yap kt\.] i.e. Satan. 9. (caraTrteii'] 1 Pet. v 8.

17. 0iry. air. ayp.] Ecclus. xlii 9 : ' a daughter is a secret (cause of) watchfulness.' Some editors take airo/co. with Bvyarqp ('eine im Hause geborgene Tochter ').
19. /uo-qd.] i.e. by her husband : cp. below fiuariSelo-r) irapa toO vvfi(plov.
21. atfros 0 Xp.] The expression ' bride of Christ ' is used of virgins already in Cyprian : Ep. 4 (62) p. 472 ed. Hartel.
22. oi)5e p.. oV.] ' does not stop

9°

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xvn

TeXevra to Beivov. irav yap BevBpov, <pt)0~l, fir] ttolovv Kapirov icaXbv eKKoirrerai xal «'? trvp ffdXXerai. ical picrrjOeiarj Be irapd tov vvutpiov ovk dpxel Xaftelv a/rroaraaiov ySt/SXtoi' /cat direXdeiv dXXa KoXaaiv alcovtov tov 5 piaovs BiBa>ai tt]v Tipwpiav. 319. Kat o ftev Kara adpica irarrip iroXXa e%ei tcl troiovvra ainui ttjv <f>vXaKT/v evKoXov Tr}<; dvyarpos. ical yap ical pijTT/p, ical Tpo(f>6<;, /cat 8epaTraivmv irXr)6o<;, ical ouclas dcr<pdXeia avvavTtXap^dverat T<a yevvr/crapevq) nrpo<; ttjv T779 irapdevov Ti]prjcnv. ovre 10 yap et? dyopav avTrjp efifidXXetv itpierai crvveyS)^ ovTe, r)viKa av ipftaXXr/, <paivea0ai tivi t&v hrrvyyavovrtov dvaytcd^eTai, tov <tkotov<; tt)<; eatrepas oi% ^ttov t&v tt)? olieias Toiywv /caXvTTTOVTo<; ttjv tpavfjvat prj ^ovXopevrjv. 320. 'K.ayplt Be tovtoov Trdcrr)<; atTia? dirrfWaicTai, a>? pr) 15 av irore eh dvBpa>v oyfriv fiiao-drjvai eXOelv ovre yap r) t&v dvay/caicov (ppovrls, ovre ai twv dBiKOVvrtov eirrjpeiai, ovre aXXo toiovtov oiBev els dvdyicrfv avrrjv roiavTrj<s o~WTV)(La<i Ka6Larr)aiv, dvri travrcov avTjj yivopevov tov Trarpos' avrr/ Be piav eyei <f>povTt,Ba pavov, to /MijBev 20 dvd^tov ptfjTe Trpd^at prJTe elirelv tt)<; airfj Trpoo~r)icovo~r)<; KoapioT7)Tos. 321. 'KvTavOa Be iroXXa to, iroiovvTa to5 jraTpl BvctkoXov, paXXov Be ical dBvvaTov, ttjv cpvXatcrjv. ovTe yap evBov eyew avTT/v peff1 eavrov BvvaiT av ovtc

7 km yap Kai] + ri vulg || 10 amy cfyz || efif}a\(ip c || ((peirat. cfy || 1 7 ovd' a\\o z vulg

short at reproaches.' Barrenness in a wife was a frequent source of conjugal unhappiness : cp. in Annam I 705 D: Puech p. 119.
1. Trap yap 5.~\ Matt, iii 10. 3. Atoo-t. |3ijSX.] Cp. Matt, v 31. 4. ic6\a<riv ktX.] ' she suffers eternal punishment in retribution for her hatred' For the difference between ic6\a<ris and n/iapia see on ii 7 {tovs. . .irpoe\o/Atvovs). 14. irdffT/s ah. dx.] ' she is free from every accusation' : i.e. she has

no legal status, and if accused must be represented in court by her father (avrl irdvTuiv airy yivonhov tov irarpds).
ai. r(p iraTpi] i.e. the spiritual father.
23. tvdov txfa] The course here declared impossible was nevertheless adopted in some cases. Chrys. wrote two treatises against the practice : (1) contra eos qui subintroductas habent virgines and (2) quod regulares (i.e. KavoviKal) feminae viris cohabitare non debeant.

III. xvil]

DE SACERDOTIO

91

yap evoyyiuav ovre aicivhvvos 77 roiavTt] o-vvoiktjo-i?. kolv yap firjBev aiiTol £r)fiuo0£>o~tv, dXX' dxepalav p,eiv<oo~i ttjv ayiatavvqv (pvXaTTOVTes, ovk iXdrrova Bd>p~ovo~i Xoyov, virep wv ecKapBdXiaav yfrv^tov, rj el elf dXXi]Xov<; dfiaprdvovre? eritxpv. tovtov Be ovk ovtos BvvaTov, ovre rd 5 KivijfiaTa Tfjs ip'V'xfj'; KarafiaOeip eviropov, ical ra fj,ev drdKTco<; (pepofieva irepiKo-ty-aL, rd Be ev rd^ei Kal pvOfim p,dXXov duKr/irai Kal eVt to fteXriov dyayelv, ovre rd<; eifob'ovs irepiepyd^eo-dat, paBiov. 322. 'H yap trevia, ical to airpooTaTevTov, ovk d<porjo-iv avTov aKpiftfj tt)? eKeivr) 10 Trpoo~r)Kovo-7]<; evKoap.ia<; yeveo~6ai e^eTao-Tr/v otov yap eavTrj irdvra BiaKOvelv dvayKatjjTai, TroXXds, ei ye fiovXoiTO p.rj aaxppovelv, tcov irpooBaiv rd? Trpo<pdo~ei<; e%et. Kal Bel tov KeXevovra BiairavTos oXkoi fieveiv Kal TavTas irepiKotyai ra<> dcpopfids, Kal ttjv twv avayKaiav ainapKetav irapa- 15 aypvTa Kal ttjv Trpb<; Taina BiaKovrjcro/xevrjv avTjj- Bel Be Kal eK(popa)v Kal iravvv)(iBu)v direlpyeiv. olBe yap, olBev 6 TroXvfi,7]%avo<; Septs eVeti>o? Kal Bia yjirjo'T&v irpd^emv

tov avTov Trapaaireipeiv top. Kal %pr) ttjv trapdevov TTavTa%odev ret^i^ecrBai, Kal oXiyaKis tov -navTof evtavTov 20 Trpoftaiveiv ttj? otVta?, OTav dirapa'iTr)TOi Kal dvayKalai KaTeireiycoo-i Trpo<pdo-eis. 323. Et Be Xeyoi Tt? ovBev elvai tovtcov epyov eiriaKOTrq) fj,eTa%eipL%eiv, ev "ctt&>, oti Tmv e<$> eKdo~T<a al (ppovTiBes Kal al aiTiai et? eKelvov eypvo'i Trjv dva<f>opdv. TroXXm Be Xvo-ireXeaTepov avTov 25

1 orav yap yz || 8 eiri Tt [HKtiov fy*z || 12 avrrj cfz |] 15 ras irpo<pa<reis vulg || 19 irepuTTrEipeiv y || 23 epyov] + to> vulg i| eiriffKOTroiv y || 24 etp' eKaffTijs yz-ryiyvofievwv yz vulg

9. ireptepy. ] ' to enquire into. ' 10. rb aTrpoff.] ' her unprotected situation'': cp. Homm. in Matt. 77 B (is airpoararevTOv ai/TTjv Kal o&teva l\ovaav. 15. &<pop/ias] ' pretexts.' 17. imp. koX ir.] 'funerals and vigils' These solemn ceremonies were sometimes marred by excesses :

see Puech p. 137 sqq. The 35th Canon of the Council of Eliberis (Elvira) enacted ' ne feminac in coemeterio pervigilent, eo quod saepe obtentu orationis latenter scelera committant': see DCA 'Obsequies of the Dead,' and ' Vigils.'
21. djrapair.] ('inexorable,' i.e.) ' urgent' 'pressing.'

92

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[III. xvn

airavTa Siaicovovp.evov dirrj\Xd-)(6ai iyKXrjfidrcov, a Sid Ta? twv erepcov afiapTias vtrop^veiv dvdjKr), r) rrj<} SiaKovias d<$>eip,evov ra? iirrep wv evpa^av erepoi rpep,eiv evOvvas. 324- Upo? Se tovtois o fiev Si eavrov ravra 5 irpaTTtov, fierd TroWr}? T175 ev/coXias airavra Sie^ep^erai' 6 Se dvayica$fievo<; fierd rov rre'iBeiv rd<; dirdmwv yvd>fias rovro iroielv, ov rotravTTjv e%ei rrjv dveaiv iic rod rrji airovpyias d^elaOai, 00a irpdyfiara koi 0opv/3ov<} Sid Toil? dvTi7riTTT0VTa<; icai rai<; avrov Kpicrecri /j,a%ofievov<i. 10 325. 'AUd irdaa<; pev ovk dv Svvaifiijv KaraXeyeiv rd<; inrep rcbv rrapOeviov (ppovriSa,*;. /cat yap icai orav avrds iyypd<peadai Serf ov rd rvypvra Trape%ovcn irpdyp,ara rm ravrrjv ire-TTKnevfiivcp ttjv olKOvop,'iav. XVIII. 32^. To Se r&v Kp'iaewv /tie/so? pvpiai fiev e%ei rdf eVa^eia?, 15 TroXXr/v Se rr)v da^oXiav, Kal Svo~KoXia<; rocravras, oaas ovSe 01 rol<; ej-atOev Sued^eiv KaOrjfievoi <f>epovcri. Kal yap evpelv avrb to Siicaiov, epyov Kal evpovra fir) Sia<p6eipai ^aXerrop. 327- Ovk do-^oXia Se fiovov koX SvaKoXia, dXXd
Kal kivSvvos rrpoo-eariv ov [ii/cpos. rjSrj yap rives ra>v 20 dcrOeveo-repcov irpdyp.ao'iv ep.treaovres, itreiSr) trpoarao-ia<;
ovk erv)(pv, evavdyrjcrav trepl rr/v trlariv. 328. IIoXXoj yap rwv r)SiKr)p,eva)v ov% r/rrov rwv tJSiktjkotcov tov<; p.r)

12 Seoi vulg || 13 to de twv Kp.~\ om Be vulg

1. Si& ras r. i. d/t.] Cp. 1 Tim. v 22.
3. t4s tnrip <Sk ktX.] i.e. tos tidtivas birhp robrav a-- .
8. airovpylas] 'personal labour? If the bishop does not do everything himself (so Chrys. argues), the relief in respect of work is more than counterbalanced by the opposition which his coadjutors excite.
XVIII. The settlement of disputes submitted to the bishopfor his decision requires especial care. Furthermore, in his personal relations, he must be above all things tactful.
13. TO...T&V Kp. ju.] Constantine

empowered bishops to act as arbitrators in disputes referred to them by the consent of both parties. To this was subsequently added the power of deciding civil suits : Soz. i 9. The impulse in this direction came originally from St Paul : see 1 Cor. vi 4, where the practice of bringing disputes before heathen judges is condemned. Bingham devotes a chapter to the subject, Origg. Eccles. II vii : see also DCA ' Appeals.'
21. ivav&yriaav] 1 Tim. i 1 9. 22. twv 17J1K.] i.e. fj tow tjSuctiKoras.

III. xvhi]

DE SACERDOTW

93

j3or)6oi>vra<; fitcrovcri- Kal ovre 7rpayp.dT(ov Bia<TTpo^>rjV, ovre Kaipfbv ^aXeiror^ra, ovre lepaTucr)<; Bwatrrela? p-eTpov, ovre aXXo toiovtov ovBev XoyL^etrOai fiovXovrar dXX' elcrlv dcrvyyvwarot BiKacnal, piav dtroXoyiav eiSoVe?, rrjv t£>v aweyovTtov avroiis kclkSsv aTraXXayrjv 6 Be p,t) 5 Svvdp.evo<; TavTTjv irapacr^eiv, Kav /xupia? X6777 nrpotpaaeL'i, ovBetroTe ttjv /caTayvtoaiv <f>ev^erai ttjv trap eKeivwv. 329. 'EitreiBrj Be irpocri ana1; ep,vrjcrdr)v, <f>epe crol teal erepav fiep,y]recov diroKaXv-tyo) irpofyaaiv. rjv yap p,r} /cad' e/ed<TTT)v r)p,epav p,a.XXov t<ov dyopaiwv Trepivocrry Ta? ot'«ia? 6 rrjv 10 eirLGKO-rrriv eyasv, irpocrKpovfiaTa evrevOev dp,v0r)Ta. ovBe yap dppeo(7TovvTe<; p.6vov aXXd Kal vyiaivovTes etriaicoirelcrOai ftovXovTai, ov tt}<> eu\a/3eMx? auTou? sin. tovto T7-poKa\ovfj,vr)t, Tip,fj<i Be koX df;i(bp,aTo<; 01 iroXXol dvriiroiovfievoi, paXXov. Et Be nrore avp,/3ai,ri Ttvd t5>v ttXov- 15 criwrepcov Kal BvvaTcorepmv, %pela<; two? Karetreiyovcrr)';, eh to koivov rrj<; i/ocXr/a-ias xepBo<; crvveyecnepov IBelv, ev8ea><; evrevdev 6a)7reia<; Kal /coXa/ceias irpoaerpl^raTO Bogav. 330. Kal tI Xeym itpocn aa ta? ical eViCT/cei/ret? ; dirb yap rwv irpoapr/aeiov povov toctovto (pepovaiv eyicXi}- 20 fiaTmv a-)(6o<;, &>? Kal fiapvveadai Kal KaTatriiTTeiv vtto rfjs d6v/ua<} 7ro\\aKi?. r)Br) Be Kal /3Xep,paros evOvvaf vTre-^ovcrt. rd yap aTrX&s irap' avTtav yevop-eva fiaaavlgovcriv aK/3(/3w? oi iroXXol, Kal peTpov <pccvfj<; i^erd^ovre^, Kal Biddeatv orjrew?, Kal TrocroTTjra yeXwrtx;. rbv p,ev Belvd, 25 <f)if)cri, BayjriXa><; etroyeXacrai; Kal <f>ai8p(S ra> irpocrco'ira) Kal

3 ava\oyifco-8ai yz || 9 /*e/i^ews fyz |] ei yap ^...Teptvoffrei yz vulg || 18 irpoaeTpiij/avTO z || 25 7rpos pev tov Seiva z irpos tov Seiva vulg [| 26 cweyeXaae fyz vulg

12. ^irnr/coir.] 'to be visited': at vi 8 it is used in an active sense.
17. I5eiv~\ ('to see,' i.e.) 'to visit.' 18. Butt. Kal ko\. kt\.) ' he gains for himselfa reputationfor adulation and flattery' : cp. iv 5 airovoias... irpoaeTptyaTo dd^av (note), Dem.

617. 4 iKTiinaTa...ir\oiTovTiva 36£ai' irpo<reTpLr'aTO tois KeKTrjp^vots.
23. to, yap kt\.~\ 'what is done casually ' (without a thought). For an-Xfis cp. i 4, iii 10, 13.
25. Troabrtyra yK.\ 'the quality (tone) of his laugh. '

94



[. 

  ) ·      .

          ,      . 33 !·         5  ,    '    ,       ;    .;  ·    ,     ·     ,

      ',         . 332· 
        ·        

,  ,  '     &,      1 5 . 6      ,   ,          ,          ,   ,       2         . 333·      ,  ,        ^  ; 334· '#        ·

     ,  ,   

25          

 » ,     

. 335·      

,        

3    £ [| 7    ' £ || 1 1 ·

  || 1 8 ]    £ || ! ^' 1§ || 22   || 27 *£ £ || 28  *

12.  .]     (-  () 36  5=' .'   4 ($ * )  (1      .

22. \.] '    ' : 5 ^^  0. 119.
23. ] .    (   ().
20.   . . .] 2 .  .

III. ]

 

95

  . 33^·     

   ,    

  6      .

337·     ,          , $            ;        ,       ,         ; 33§·    

 ,     ,    ,      ·      , 

     ,   -

. 339·       ; 1 5

  . 34°·     

     ,   

 , ,     ,

      , 

  .

20

3  * || 5    ||     || .]

  || 13  ]  "  || 17    £ | -

...  

·

9·   . . .] ' !     -- V
.   . . . ]  .  3: · .   . 427 , & ' .

13· ] .  17. 05.     (   .   >\8 §     : 5 .  .  .   ( - -. \. ).

AoroS A'.
TaSe evecrTLV iv t<5 8' \6ya>.
I. Oti ov povov ol <Tirov&d£ovTt<s bti icX^pov l\6tiv, aXka. ko.1 ol avdyKTjv vrrop.ivovTv;, iv ois av apidpruxri, <T(p6opa KoXd^ovrai.
II. On ol xtiporovovvTts dva^lovs rrjs avrfjs aurois tl<r\v virevdvvoi Ti/xeopia?, kolv dyvouxri tovis xeiporovovp-cvovs.
III. *Ori iroXX^s TT7? tv tu Xeyciv Swa/iw XP£'a T<? "Pe'» IV. Oti irpos rots diravTwv /m^a? Kat EXXTyvcov «at 'IouSaiW
Kai ai.piTiK.iLv TraptCTKtva&dcu xprj. V. "Oti crtjioBpa e/x7reipov ctvai 8«i 1-175 SiaXeKTiioJs. VI. Oti to! p.aKapLw HauAu) /^dXiora tovto KaTuipOunro. VII. Oti ouk dxo Taiv o-qp.iitav /xovov Xap^irpos iyevcro, dAXa
/cai airo TOV%Xe'yeiv. VIII. Oti kcu jj/xas tovto /3ouX«Tat Ktrrop^ovV.
IX. *Oti toutov p-i/ 7rapoVros t<3 Upei, iroXX^v avayxr) toi?s dp^ofiivov: fcri/Liav v<piorao"0ai.

I. 341. TauTa 6 Bao"iXeto? aicovaa^, ical fuicpbv eirio-^mv 'AXX' el fiev avTO<> ecrirov8ao-d<;, $7)0-1,, TavTijv KTrjo-ao-Qcu tt)v ap^-qv, etyev av aov \6yov ovtos 6 (poftos. 342. Tbv yap 6p.o\oytjaavTa eirtTrjBeiov elvat 7rpo? ttjv tov

I. Not only those who endeavour to obtain some high office in Church or State, but also those upon whom such an office is thrust against their

will, are held accountable for the evil effect of unwise government, This is illustrated by the examples of Saul, Eli, Moses, and others.

IV. ]

 

97

    ,     ,    ,                 ,  '    6      5 ,     ,     . 343·            ,      ,            , -  ,        ;  6  ;  6      ; '       . 344·         ·  '  15
,          , '    ,          ,       . 345·       2   ,               ,  ,    ,     ,   .       ,     2 

3 «»  « £ [| 4    || 5 \  || 6    ||      || 7   1§ ||  *
* £ |] 14   ^ II 6   || 2     II 24    5    . 

1. 4   \.~] '     « ' : . «V     2.
3· ] . 6   ! !   ().
12.   . . .] . \

   4· ;,  ] ' ,'
..      .  : . ! !   5·
23· ] .   5 ().

. .

7

98

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. I

iirifieKoviMevw rrj<; iroifivr}*; tov Xpto-Toi), aU' e/Mol ird<rr}<; Tifitopiat %a\67rwT6poi' r)v axiTO to iriaTevOevra npdypMTa ovto) fieydXa irepl tov irurTevaavTa ovt<o <f)avr)vai ica/cov. 346. Tw/09 ovv eveicev T)v%o/u.7)v ttjv &6%av aov TavTrjv fir) 5 hiaveaelv ; iva Tot? d0Xioi<; Kal TaXat7rd)poi<; (ovtoo yap Bet KaXetv tovs ov% evpicrKOVTw; KaX&<; TavTTjs upocrTrjvat tt}? Trpayp.aTeia'i, Kav fivpidici<} avTovs 717305 dvdyKrjv ^%0at Xeyy<;, Kal ayvoovvra? d/iapTetv) Xva tovtois Bia<pvyelv yevrjTai to irvp eicelvo to aafteaTov, Kal to <tk6to<; 10 to i^wTepov, Kal tov o~KOiXrjKa tov aTeXevTTjTov, Kal to Bt'X^OTO/j.rjOrjvai, Kal to fieTa t&v viTOKpiT&v diroXeo-Oat. aXXd tL aot irddm ; ovk ecrTt TavTa, ovk eari. 347- Kal, el ftovXet ye, dirb tt;? /3ao-tXe(,a<; irp&Tov, r}? ov toctoOto? $o~o<; ttj<; lep(oavvr)<; tc3 6ea> \6yos, Trape^a o-ot, tovtcov, av 15 elirov, ttjv iriaTiv. 34^- 'O %aoi)X eKetvo<;, 6 tov Kets vlo<{, ovk ai>TO<; o-7rov8do~a<; eyeveTO /3ao-t\ei«?, dXX' aTrfjXOe (iev eVt ttjv t&v ovcov ^rjTrjo-tv, Kal virep tovtwv ipoiTtjo-cov tov irpofyrjT'qv fjp^eTO · 6 he avTco irepl tt}? f$a<rtXeLa<; Bte-
XeyeTO. Kal oi/Be outw? etrehpafie, Ka'irtot irapd dvBpbs 20 aKovasv TrpocfytjTov · aWa Kal dveBveTO, Kal iraprtTeiTO,
Xeycov Ti<? elfit eyw, koi Tt? 0 oIkos tov 7raTpo? fiov ; tl oZv ; eiretBr) Ka/cms e-xprjaaTo tt/ mapa tov 0eov BoOeiar] Ttp,{), io")(vcrev avTov e^eXeadat TavTa to, prjfiaTa tt}? tov fiaaCXevo-avTos opyrjs ; 349. KatTot 76 evrjv Xiyetv

?5 cvpovras vulg ]| tovs ovk e<rxvK0Tas Kakws ravrrjv OLKOvop.r/o'at rrfv ·jrpayiw.Tei.av z || 8 om iva tovtms z || 10 rov o.koiim)tov fy*z || 1 1 oiroXeirfiai] Tt$T)vai z || 24 op7i)$] + ovSafiUS z

3. irepi . . . KaK.bv\ i.e. Kaxiiv irepi t6v ttktt. : ' so base towards--. '
9. to irup iiceivo /ctX.] Is. lxvi 24, Matt, xxiv 51, xxv 30, Mkix 48. Cp. iv 2, where this passage is largely repeated. Chrys. often argues against the popular belief that hell, if it exists at all, is intended for Jews and pagans only, not for Christians: see Puech pp. 192 sqq.

10. to Sixoro/t.] Matt, xxiv 51. 12. rl <rot irdflw;] Cp. (coJ t£ irdOw; ii 6 (note). 16. i.Trj\6e kt\.~\ 1 Sam. ix. 20. aveSiieTo xal Trap.] ' he tried to shun and avoid it.' 21. rls el/u iyib kt\.~\ These words are a free paraphrase of 1 Sam. ix 21.

IV. I]

DE SACERDOTIO

'. 99

tt/30? rov XafwvTjX eyKaXovvTa aiirm- M.r) yap avros iweBpafiov rfj ^aatXeia; firj yap eireirriBrjaa rainy rfj Bvvao~Telq; tov raw IBuot&v e/3ovX6p,r]v ftiov £rjv rov airpdyfiova ical r)av^Lov, crv Be fie eVt tovto eiXicvaas to agicofia. ev eKeivrj fievoov rrj TaireivorijTi, evKokas av 5 ravra e%eic\bva to. Trpoa/cpovfiara. ov yap Bijttov t£>v 7roXXcov els <*>v ical darjfuov, eirl tovto av e^eire/Mpdijv to epyov, oi>B' av efiol tov 7rpos tous 'ApaXyKiTWi iroXefiov ive%eipt,o-ev 6 6eo<s · prj ey^eipiadel<i Be, ovk av iroTe ravTTjv rjfiapTOv tt/v dfiapTuav. 350. 'Atta Tavra irdvra 10 aarOevrj irpof aTroXoyiav ovk dadevf) Be fiovov, dXXa ical iiriKivBvva, ical fidXXov iicicaUi tov Oeov ttjv opyr/v. 35 !· Tov yap virep tt)v d%iav rifirjdevTa ovk et's 7-771* to>v dfiapTrjfiaTcov diroXoyiav ^pr) irpofSdXXeadai ttjs Tifir)<; to fieyeOoi, dXXa ets fiei^ova /3eXTi<oo-eco<; TrporpoirTjv Ke^prj- 15 uOat, tj) iroXXfj irepl avTov tov Oeov airovBrj, 352. 'O Be, Bioti KpeiTTOvo<; ervj(ev a£ta>/iaTos, Bid tovto dfiaprdveiv avTw vofii^mv efjeivai, ovBev eTepov r) ttjv tov Oeov <f>tXavOpwiriav alriav t&v olKelwv dfiapTrifidrcav eiriBel^ai. earirovBaKev oirep rots dcref3eai koI padv/uos tov eavT&v 20 BioiKovai /3t'oj> Xeyeiv edos dei. aXX' ov% r)fia<i ovtco BiaKelcrOai XPV> oiBe els tt)v axiTrjv exeivoK iKirlirreiv fiaviav, dXXd Travra^pv airovBd^eiv to, trap eavTwv ela<\>epeiv ets Bvvap.iv Trjv f)p,erepav, koI eij<fii]fiov Kal yX&rrav Kal Bcdvoiav e%eti>. 353- OvBe yap 6 'HXl (Xva tt)v 25 fSaaiXeiav d<pevTe<s, eirl ttjv iepooavvqv, irepl r)<; r)plv 6 Xoyo$, eXOco/iev vvv) eo~irovBao-e KTrjaaodai ttjv dpyrpi' ri

12 ckkguovto. bz vulg II 15 /ieifovos y* || irpoKotrriv y' vulg || 19 tuv iSiuv afuipr. f || 20 e<nrovda<re vulg || 22 c/iirtTTeiv f

8. 'A/mKriK.] 1 Sam. xv. 15. els ficlf. p. irp.] ' as a greater
incentive to virtue.' HpoKOTfy (see critical note) would mean 'progress.'
23. t& rap' iavruv] 'our assistance.'

24. els Svi>. ttjv ri/i.] 'to the best of our ability'' : cp. els Sivafuv rijK
i/ity iii 1 (note). 25. 'HM] 1 Sam. iv 18 : cp. adv.
oppugn, vit. monast. Ill 79 B foil.

IQO

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. I

ovv avToy tovto, rjvuca rjfiaprev, ayvrjcrev ; ical n Xeym, KrtfcracrOai ; ovBe Bia<f>vyelv fiev ovv, eiirep r)0eXe, hvvarbv 7]v avTa>, Bia tt)v dvdyicr)v tov vofiov ical yap r)v tt)? Aein <j>vXr}<;, ical ttjv dp^rjv Bia tov yevovs dvco&ev icaTafiai5 vovcrav eBei Be^ao~6ai. dXX ofia><; ical ovrof rf}<; twv traiBwv irapoivias eBeoice oiicqv ov fiiiepdv. 354- Tt Be; avrof 6 7rpwTo? yev6p.evo^ twv 'lovBaicov lepevs, irepl ov roaavra BieXe%07} o Oeos to3 Mftwtret, eireiBr) fir) ta^vcre pMvos Trpo? toctovtov irXrjdovs arrjvai fiaviav, ov irapa io fuicpov rjXdev dtroXeadai,, ei fir) r) tov aBeX<f>ov irpoaraaia eXvcre tov deov rrjv opyijv ;' 355- 'RireiBr/ Be Ma>iio-e<i>9 ep.vjcrOrjp.ev, icaXov ical e'/c twv eiceivw o-vfifteftrjicoTcov Bel^ai tov Xoyov T7]v dXrjffeiav. avTO? yap ovtos o p,aicdpio<} Mwvcrrjs togovtov aireaye tov ttjv irpoaTaaiav dpirdcrai 15 twv 'lovBaiwv, a)? ical BiBofievrjV TrapyTrjcrOai, ical deov KeXevovTos dvavevcrat, fVt Toaovrov, a>? ical trapo^vvai tov irpoo-TaTTOVTa. ical ov Tore fiovov, dXXd ical fieTa ravra, yevo/Aevos eVi Trj<; dp%r)<;, virep tov TavTT)? dtraXXayr^vat, r)8eco<; direOvrjatcev. ' Att6ktivov yap p.e, (prjcriv, el ovtw 20 p.oi fieXXeis Troieiv. 356. Ti ov~v; eiretBr) i]/j,apTev eirl tov vBaTO<;, la-^vaav at avve^el^ atnai irapaiTr)crei<; diroXoyrjcracrOai inrep avTov, ical ireicrac tov deov Bovvat, arvyyvwp/r\v ; xal troOev aXXodev TJ7? eTrr)yyeXp,ivr)<> direcrTepeiTO

2 enrep] + km z |] 6 vapavofims byz henr || n 8c] post hoc interpunxi || 8 ovk ur;rwe J II I2 ttvytQw z II 15 irapavniaa&Bai f oliv TrapairetaBai cyz franc || 16 xai «ri roaovrov cf om eiri Toaovrov us vulg || 19 i)Jews] + op y vulg || 2 1 aurai] aurow y

1. rl X. kt. kt\.] ' why do I say " obtain " ? nay, he could not escape it, even had he so wished.'
6. irapoivias] 'drunken violence.' The word is often confused in MSS with jrapavo/i/as.
7. 6 irpwros kt\.~\ Aaron. 8. iirciSi) ktX.] Ex. xxxii. 9. oti 7rapd [w<p6v kt\.] 'was he not within an ace of being put to

death ? ' For irapd cp. Trap' oitev i 5 (note).
15. TaprjT^<r$ai] Ex. iii n, iv 10.
16. xapof. rhv vp.] Ex. iv 14. 19. anbKravav ktX.] Numb, xi 15. 20. itrl rob CSaTOt] Numb, xx 7-- 12> 23. trbBtv iWodey ktX.] '/or

IV. I]

DE SACERDOTIO

101

7J7?; ovBafiodev aXXoOev, to? atravTe<$ 'iafiev, aXX' rj Std tt)v dfiapriav Tavrrjv, Si fjv o 0avfiaaTO<; i/ceivos dvr)p ovk larvae twv avTOiv Tot? upj(pp.evoi<; rir^elv dXXa fierd toiis ttoXXous ddXovs Kal ra<; TaXanrooplas, fiera ttjv irXdvrjv eKeivrjv ttjv acjxiTOv Kal tov<; iroXenovs Kal rd 5 rpoiraia, e£a> T99 yr}<! direOvrjo-Kev, virep rj? roaavTa ifiox07)<re- Kal rd tov 7reXdyov<! vTrofieivas icaicd, t&v tov Xtfj,evo<s ovk dirijXavaev dyad&v. 357- 'Opa? &>? ov to?? dpird^ov<n povov, aXX" ovBe Tot? etc T779 kripcav o-irovBr)<i etrl tovto ip%op.evoi<;, XeLirerai ti?, ev olf dv irTaiacaaiv, 10 diroXoyia ; "Otrov yap 01, tov 6eov ")(eipoTovovvTo<;, trapaiTrio-dfievoi TroXXdici<i, ToaavTTjv eBwKav BIktjv, Kal ovBev la^ytrev e%eXeo~6ai tov kivBwov tovtov ovte tov 'Aapmv, ovt tov HXi, ovTe tov fjbaKuptov i/ceivov dvBpa, tov dyiov, tov ·trpo^ryxrjv, tov 0avfiao~Tov, tov trpaov fj.dXio-Ta irdvTav 15 twv etrl yfj<;, tov a>? <f)iXov XaXovvTa rqi Bern' o-^oXfj ye r)p,lv, Tot? toctovtov cnroBeovci Trj<> dpeTr)<i Trjs eKeivov, Bvvqo-eTat irpos divoXoyiav dpKeaai to avveiBevat, eai/Tot? fiijBev virep Tavri?? eo-TrovBaKoo-t, Trjs dp^rjs' Kal p.dXio-Ta ore iroXXal tovtcov t&v %eipoTOvia>i> ovk diro tt}<; 6eia<i 20 yiyvovTdi j(apiTO<;, aXXa Kai airo tj/s t£>v dvQponirmv o-irovBrjs. 35^- Toz/ 'lovBav o 6eo<; efeXefaro, Kal et? tov ar/iov eKeivov KaTeXe^e -)(pp6v, Kal ttjv diroaToXiKr]v dl~lav

I ovdafi. aWodev] om aWodev cyz |] 4 a8\ovs'] xpovovs cz vulg [| 8 a?reXavcrev h || 9 njs twv erepuv y vulg || II ovtoi 0eov fz || 13 tovtovs cfyz II 14 top TrptxtyriT-qv tov ayiov z || 16 eiri tijs y>)s z vulg

·what other reason was he deprived
of the promised land?' : cp. contra eos qui subintr. habent virg. 239 E.
3. tG>v ainwv t. &PX' T-] 'to obtain as much as those whom he governed.' Tois i.px- is dative after T&v abrwv.
15. Trpdov p.d\to~ra kt\.] Numb. xii 3.
16. us ipiXov X. t. 0.1 Ex. xxxiii 11.

ib. <rx°^V 7e ^j"'" ktX-I 'the
consciousness of having made no attempt to secure this office will scarcely be able to benefit us, who fall so far short of his virtue.' For ffxohy ye cp. iii 15 ffXoXg 7' 5k ai wpoeipr]pjvai irpotpdo'eis tovto tpyaWcuvTO (note).
20. xeiP°T-] 'ordinations': cp. x«poTOKi}<rei>' i 3 (note).

102

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. i

fieTci t&v Xom&v eve%elpio-ev eSeoKe Be ti Kal t&v dXXeov irXeov avrS, rrjv t&v yjpi]pATu>v oiicovofuav. tI ovv ; iireiBr) tovtois d/upoTepois ivavTicos i^pijaaro, Kal ov iirtarevdr] KtjpvTTeiv, irpovBioKe, Kal a KaX&i Btoifcelv 5 eve^eipiadr} ravra dvrfkaxre icaicws, efjecfrvye rrjv Tiftapiav ; Bia, avro p,ev ovv tovto Kal ^aXevcoTepav eavrw rrjv BIktjv eipydaaro. Kal p.aka ye et/coTO)?. 359. Ov yap el$ to t«3 de<p Trpoo-Kpoveiv Bel KaTaKe^prjadai rat? irapa tov deov Bi8opAvat,<; Tifiais, sU' ei? to ftaWov dpeaiceiv avT&. 10 360. 'O Be, eireiBr) irXeov TeTlp,i\Tai, Btd tovto dgi&v aTTOtpvyeiv, iv ol<; av KoXd^eaOai Bey, irapairXri<nov iroiel, wcrirep av el Tt9 ical twv dirlaTcov 'lovBalcov aKovaas tov XptffToO XeyovTO<;, oti Et fir) rjXQov koX iXdXr)o~a avTois, dfiapTiav ovk elj(pv' /cat, Et firj to o-rjfiela etrolovv iv 15 avTols, d p,r)Bels aXXos eiroiyo-ev, dpapTiav ovk elypv' iy/caXolrj tu> o-coTrjpi ical evepyeTy, Xeymv Tt yap f/p^ov fcal eXaXeis ; tL Be eVoiei? aijfieia, Xva fiei%6va><; r)p.d<s KoXdo-rjs ; 36 1. AUd p,avla<s Ta ptffiaTa TavTa, ical T77? eo"^aTrj<: TrapaTrXrjIjuis. o yap laTpos 01% Xva ae KaTatcptvy 20 rjXOev, dXXd fiaXXov depairevawv, Kal Xva diraXXdgr) tjJ? voaov TeXeov <rii Be aavTov eittov direo-Tepr)o-a<; t&v eiceivov ")(eip&v. 8e%ov to'lvvv 'yaXe'irwTepav ttjv Tificoplav. &o~irep yap el eZ£a? ry Oepairelq, Kal t&v irpoTepwv av diryXXdyrj^ KaK&v, ovtco<s eTreiBr) -jrapayivofievov IB&v e$vye<;, ovk ert

3 airexprl<"lT0 yz II 4 koXws Siaicoveiv f |] 8 reus irapa 8cov yz vulg || 12 TOV KVpiOV \67OVTOS yz || I4 CTTOHJffa Cfz || 15 OvSciS y || l8 TO TOIOUTO prjuara yz || 19 ovx U'a <re KwraKpivi) /idWov ij\0e Btpairtvo-usv vulg 6epavevaai e || 20 $epairevo-(iiv'] + ovx tva °~e voffouiTa TraptSjj (a\Xa wa airaWa^Tj kt\.) vulg, et codd omnes praeter acgiwy franc oliv : om etiam vet int || ottoXXoIt;] + re y II 24 ovkct' av airoviif/. z

2. XP- oIkov.1 Jn xii 6. 13. X^yoxTosjfn xv 22,24. In the second part of the quotation WH. read tl t4 tpya /j.tj 4iroirj<ra iv airois a oiSeU dXXos iirolijffev, a/iaprlav oiK ttxo<rav (ttxovav also for elxov in the first part).

18. /uiWas] For the genitive cp. iv 9 tovto oiv awovolas, tovto kcvoSoi-las, rb pi] BeXr/aai kt\. : more commonly an epithet is added, as in rijs £o~x.A.tt)i irapair\ri£las immediately afterwards,
21. TAeov] ' completely.'

IV. I]

DE SACERDOTIO

103

dirovisJraaOai Tavra Bvvtfcrr)- fMrj Bvvdp,evo<; Be, ical tovtchv SoWei? Trjv Tifimpiav, ical dvd' <$v avra fiaraiav rrjv atrovBtjv hroi/qacK, to 76 fiepoi to gov. 362. Aid ravra ovk icrrjv irpb tov TiprjBrjvai trapd tov 6eov ical ftera rd$ Tipds T7)v fidaavov virop.kvop.ev, dXkd iroXXw crcpoBpoTepav vo~re- 5 pov. 6 yap prjBe t§5 iraOelv ev yevo/tevos dya66<; irucporepov StKato? av etr) KoXd^ecrdai. 363. 'E7ret ovv acr6evr)t r)pTiv avrrj 7/ airoXoyia BiBetierai, ical ov pbvov 011 crco^et Toiii et? avrrjv KaTafyevyovras, dXXa ical trpoBLBwo-i irXeov, erepav rjptv iropiareov dacpdXeLav. 364. BA2. Tloiav Br) 10 ravTTjv ; &><? 70)76 oi/Be iv epavrm Bvvapui eivai vvv ovrca fie ep<j>of3ov ical evrpouov Tot? ptfpMai KaTeo~Tr)cra<; tovtois. II. 365. Mr), Beop,ai, e<j}r)v, ical dvrifioX&, prj roaovrov KaTaf3d\rj<! cravrov. ecrri yap, eo~riv dcrcpdXeia. Tot? pev daOevecriv r)plv, to p/rfBewore ep-trecreiv vp.lv Be Tot? 15 loyvpois, to rd<i eXirlBas Try? o-coTrjpias et? erepov p.ev dvrjpTrjo-dat p,r)Bev, p,era Be ttjv rov Oeov %dpiv el? to firjBev dvdljiov npaTreiv rfj<{ BcDpea? ravTT)<s ical tov BeBcok6to<; avTrjv Oeov. 366. MeyiaTr)? p,ev yap av elev icoXdo-a)9 a^ioi 01 perd to oV oliceia<; airovBr)^ Tavrr)'} eirnv^eiv 20 Tr)s dp%r)<; r) Bid paOvpiav r) Bia irov-qpiav r) ical Si dtreiplav KaKO)<; Ke%pr)pevoi tc5 Trpcvyparr ov p,f)v Bid tovto

6 firjde Tapa to iradtiv y fitj^ ev tu wadeiv f || TriKpoTepws y' vulg |f 9 eis ravTTjv f || 11 e7U7e] + oi/nai c || 17 avTiprnjaBat /iijiec pera. Tt)V too 0eov xaPlv °^' V e's T0 /">'** y' vulg

3. t6 ye /itpos rb abv~\ ' as far as in you lay' : cp. iv 2 to ye iifUTepov ju^pos, iv 6 t6 ye ainCbp fi4pos.
11. oi)S^ iv i/iavrif kt\.~\ ' I cannot control myself: cp. vi 12 iv t'/iai»-n2 yeviaBtu.
12. tix<pofiov koI fvrp.] Cp. Hebr. xii 21.
II. Hence the need for careful self-examination on the part of those who are about to be made bishops. No one ought to embark upon duties for which he feels himself to be
unfitted.

13. nil, beofiai kt\.] For the repetition of /«} cp. ^t), irapaxaXu, fi.it ^'r' ToaoSror dirarwnev eavrois (below).
15. to fvt\hiir. ifirr .] 'never to enter upon' (the office of bishop).
16. raj A7r(8as kt\.] 'to have your hopes of salvation dependent, after (receiving) the grace of God, on nothing but the avoidance of all that is unworthy of that gift, and of God the giver. ' Merit seems to bear a temporal sense.

104

CHRYS0ST0MUS

[IV. n

tois ovk eairovBaKoai KaraXeXenrral Tt? avyyvuifir], aXXa Kal ovroi ira(T7]<; diroXoyla<; eo-reprjvrai. 367. Aet yap, 01/j.at,, kclv fivpioi KoXaJcrt Kal Karavay/cd^wai, p-rj 77-/30? iiceivovs bpav dXXa trporepov rrjv eavrov fiaaavio-avra 5 "tyv)(i)v, Kal irdvra Btepevvr)o-d/j,evov a/cpiftm, ovtcos elgai to?? /3ta%o/j,evot<;. 368. Nth/ oe oliciav fiev olKoBop,ij<rao-dai ovBels av vTrocr^eaOai roXp,ijo~eie rwv ovk ovrav oiKohofitk&v oiBe aapArav dyjraodai vevoo~r\KOTU>v eiri^etp^o-eiev av Tt? tS>v larpeveiv ovk elBorcov dXXa kov iroXXol ol 10 7T/30? fiiav mdovyres wai, Trapairtjo-erai, Kal ovk epvOpidaeL ttjv ayvotav. yfrv^cov Be eirifieXeiav p,eXXcov ep/wio-revecrQai roo-ovrwv, oiiK e^erdaei irporepov eavrov, dXXa, kcLv dirdvtcov drreiporaros f/, Be^erai rr/v BiaKoviav, eveiBrj 6 Belva KeXevei, Kal 6 Selva fttd^erai, Kal 'iva firj irpoo-Kpovarj rm 15 Belvi; 369. Kal ircb<; ovk els TTpoviTTov eavrov fier iKelvwv ifi/SaXel KaKov; i^bv yap avra> o~d>%ea9ai Ka6' eavrov, Kal erepov; irpoa-aTroXXvai p-eS" eavrov. rroOev ydp eariv eXtriaao o-corrjplav ; iroQev o~vyyvd>p,T]<; rv\elv ; rive? rj/Ma'i ·Kapairrjo-ovrai, rore; ol fiia£6p.evoi vvv tVo)? Kal irpof 20 dvdyKrjv eXKOvres ; avrovs Be rovrov; rt? Kar eKelvov 8tao-(bo~ei rbv Kaipov ; Kal yap Kal avrol irpoaBeovrai ereptov, Iva 8ia<pvya>o-i to irvp. 37°- "On Be o~e ov BeBirrop.evo<i ravra Xeyw vvv, dXX' &>? e^et to irpayp.a dXrjdelas, aKOve rl rw /Madrjrfj <pt)o~\v o fiaKapios TlavXos TifJ,odea>, 25 rw yvTjaicp reKvw Kal dyaTrrjrm' Xetpa? Ta^ew? p,r)Bevl

1 KaraXeiircTiu cfyz vulg || 4 fSaaavifovTa y*z || 6 vvv p.ev yap y II 7 ovk uv toii> oikoSo/ukuv y* || 9 /ir) etSorwv y || 18 yfiat irapaarqaovTOj. c i)pj.v Tapaarrio-ovrai ehklstz 17/ias efairija-oxrai uy vulg || 24 aKovaov y

5. oOtws ell-ai.~\ 'then, and then only, to yield.''
o. vvv 5^] iam vero : used to introduce an example or illustration.
15. xpoviTTov . . .k<ik6v] Cp. TpovTtrov...KaKbv iii 7 (note).
17. irbBev yap iffnv A. (ran-.;] a senarius: see on 6 xds airdvTav

kt\. ii 1. 22. SeSiTT.] ' trying to frighten.' 23. us (%el ktK"\' in all truth'':
cp. Thuc. vii 2 lis elxov r&xovs 4fior)8ovv.
25. t$ yvqclif t. Kal (I7.] 1 Tim. i 2, 2 Tim. i 2.
ii. xeipas rax. iiriT.] 1 Tim. v 22.

IV. II]

DE SACERDOTIO

105

eTririOei, fir/Be KOivcovet afiapTLais akXoTplat,?. 371. Etfie? 00-77? roii? /j.e\Xovra<! r/fias em, tovto irapdyeiv, ov /iepifrea>$ fiovov, dXXa Kal Tifiapia^, to ye tffieTepov dirr)XXd^ap,ev fiepos ; 372. "flcnrep yap rot? alpedeiaiv ovk avrapices 7T/30? airoXoyiav to Xeyeiv, Ovk avTOKXr]To<; rfXdov, ovBe 5 TrpoeiBws ovk direfyvyov ovt(o<; ovBe tov(; j(etpoTOvovvra<; axpeXfjaai n BvvaTai, el Xeyoiev tov ^eiporovqOevTa dyvoelv. 373- ciK\a Bid tovto xal fiei^ov to ey«A.r//xa yiveTai, OTi ov rjyvoovv iraprjyayov Kal f) BoKOVcra elvai aTroXoyia av^ei tt}v KaTt)yopiav. 374- II «5? ydp ovk 10 cltottov, dvBpdiroBov fiev irpiaaQai f3ovXop,evov<; Kal taTpot? eiriBeiKvvvai,, Kal TT79 irpdo-ew<s e'yyvjjTa? dtraiTelv, Kal yeiToveov irvvOdveaOai, Kal fieTa Tama irdvTa pvqheirw Oappelv, dXXa Kal %povov iroXvv 71730? BoKtfiacriav avreiv elf Be Too~avTt)v Xenovpyiav fteXXovrds Tiva eyypdcpeiv, 15 a7rXw? Kal a>? erv)(ev, dv tw Belvi Bo^tj 71730? ydpiv rj 7rpo? dire)(6et.av eTepcov fiapTvpfjcrai, eyKpiveiv, p,7]Bep,iav ttolovfievow; eTepav e^eTaariv; 375- Tt? ovv rjp-ds egaiTijo-eTai TOTe, tw 6<peiXovTO)v irpoo-Trfvai Kal avrcov TrpoaTaTSiV Beofievcov; 376. Aei fiev ovv Kal tov ^eipoToveiv p,eX- 20 XovTa TroXXrjv TroieicrBai rr/v epevvav TroXXq) Be TrXeiova tovtov tov 'xeipoTovov/ievov. 377- Ei yap Kal koivwvov? ej(ei Trjs KoXdaew; tov<; eXofievovs, iv ol? dv dp-apTy dXX' 6/xa>? ovBe avToi d-rrrjXXaKTai TJ79 Tip.mpia<;, dXXd Kal p,el£ova Btoo-er 378. fiovov el p,r) Bid. Tiva dvQpanrivrjv 25

2 rapayayeiv y irpoayeiv fa || 3 a.7n;XXa{e y || 13 ovSewoi dappeiv c || 15 eyypacpe<r8aiyz || 18 e£aipr;<rcT<u y* || 25 SiSwai yz vulg

3. to ye int. fttpos] Cp. t6 ye ficpos to abv iv 1 (note).
5. to Xtyeiv kt\.] 'to say " I did not come of my own accord." '
12. iyyvr\Ta.i\ 'sureties.' 16. 6> TijJ Seixi <ctX.] 'according as some person sees Jit to testify for or against others.' Thus if A recommends B, and speaks unfavourably of C, B will be preferred, whether

he is better than C or not. For *7>os x&Plvt "^P05 At^x""0" cp. v 1.
19. twv 6<pei\. /ctX.] Cp. quis custodiet ipsos custodes? Juv. vi 347.
23. iv ots S> ifidprrf] Cp. (v oU &v acpaXryrai iv 1 (note).
25. )thvov el ,im) ictX.] 'unless those mho promoted him did so for some personal reason, contrary to their better judgment.'





[. 

,        .     ,    , .          ,        5 . 6              "   . 379· ^'     < ,        ,      ,       .   ; '                      ,   ,       15 ,        ,    ,     ,    ,          . 3^0.     2            ,      ,    ,    ,      ;          . 25 3^1·      ,   ,     )  

4 --TM  £ || 6   \ || 8 ·  ||    ||    * || 17 ;   || 1 8  !  {*1     || 23 \   ||      || 25   || 20    \>{   \

8. ] .   4 ().
12.   ] ..   \ : 8    /  .

1 6.  -] ..   ., ' /.'
8.  .....] .    § 3 (7).
26.   ]  & 

IV, II]

DE SACERDOTW

lO"

dvdyKrj- ottov Be fj icokaais alwvios T019 ovk elBoat, fiera^eipi^etv iepa><Tvwr)v, difka)^ Kal a>? erv^e togovtov dvaSef;6fie6a klvBvvov, rrjv erepwv TrpoftaWopevoi ftiav ; aXX' ovk dve^erat, Tore 6 ravra icpivwv 7\pZv. 382. "ESei fiev yap zeal 7roWS irKeiio rwv aapKiKwv irepl rd TrvevpariKa 5 ttjv do~(pd\ei,av eiriSei^aadaf vvv he ovBe icr/v evpicrKopeOa ·jrape'xpp.evoi. 383. EiVe yap fioi, el riva VTroTrrevcravTes dvBpa elvai tcktovikov ovk ovtcl reKroviKov ·trpb'i rrjv epyaalav KaXolp,ev, 6 Be eirono, elra d>}rdp.evo<; T179 7T/30? rrjv oiKoSoftrjV Trapeo-Kevao-fievrjs v\rj<; d<pavi£oi p.ev %vka, 10 a<pavl£oi Be \idov<i, epyd^otro Be rrjv oiKiav ovrwi, <&? evffetos KaTcnreo-etv dpa dpKeaei 7rpc? diroXoyiav avrdi to Trap erepcov r/vayKacr&ai, Kal ftrj avTeirayyeXrov r)Keiv ; ovBap,<S<;' Kal p,dXa ye elKorcof Kal BiKalw;. e^prjv ydp, Kal erepcov koXovvtwv, aTroTTTjBav. 3^4- EtTa t&> p*ev ^vXa 15 d<f>avl^ovTi Kal Xlffovs, ovBep,La ecrrat, KaTa<f>vyr) 7rpb<! ro p,r) Bovvai BiKrjv 6 Be yfrv%a<; arroXXu? Kal oiKoBopMV a/ieXw? t^v erepwv dvdyKi)v aTro^prjv avrw 77/309 to Bia(pvyelv oierai ; 385. Kai 7rw? ov Xiav evrj0e<; ; ovirw yap TTpoo-Ttdr)p,i, on top p.r) j3ovXop,evov ovSet? dvayKaaat, 20 Bwrjcrerai. dXX' ecreo p/vplav avrov vnrop,ep.evr\Kevai filav, Kal p,r)%avd$ TToXvTpoTrovs, ware ep,7recreti> · tovto ovv avrov
e^aiprjaeTai t?)? KoXdaew; ; p.7), irapaKaXw, fir/ eirl rocrovtov aTrarup^ev eavroix;- p,r)Be v7T0Kpivd>p,eda dyvoelv rd Kal Tot? dyav natal <f>avepd. ov ydp Bijttov Kal eVt r&v 25 evOvvwv avrr/ tt)9 dyvolas 77 7rpoo-7rol7)o-i<; $//,&<; wfyeXrjO-ai

4 0 Tore Kpivtov rjfias z vulg || 6 eirideiKvvffdcu yz || 7 virovoytravTes f || 9 KaXot/xev auros Se eiroiro vulg || 17 0 Se tos i//vxas yz vulg || 18 Trpos to /xt] Suujyvyuv vulg |] ·21 Swyaerai] + irore c || 22 wore py efiTe<reiv z

future indicative see Clem. Alex. Stromateis vii (ed. Hort-Mayor), Appendix B.
3. ·ri)F ir. irpo|3. /3/ok] 'pleading
in excuse that we were driven to this by others' : cp. iydyKTJv vpofiaKiaBM koX filav vi 1.

11. tarta] 'let it be granted that-- .'
25. ivl twv efflwuv] 'at the scrutiny? i.e. on the day of judg-
ment : for this use of £rl cp. eirl t&v oI&kwv iii 7 (note).

108

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. II

Bwijaerai. 386. Ovk ecnrovSacras avrbs TaxiTr/v Be%ao~6ai ttjv ap^-qv, aaQk.vei.av aeavTw avveiBd><;; e«5 ical koXcos. e^prjv ovv fieTa, Trj<; ai)Trj<; Trpoaipeaea>$, ical erepcov icaXovvtcov, airoirrfBav. rj ore fiev oiBelt e/caXei, aaOevrj<; ai) 5 ical ovk iiriTrjh'ew eireiBr) Be evpeQr)aav ol BmcrovTes Trjv Tifirjv, yeyovat i^aicpvrjs tV^vpo? ; 3^7- TeXw? ravra Kal XrjpoL, Kal tt}? eo-)(aTr)<; a^ia Tlfuopta*}. AiA yap tovto Kal 6 icvpios ·wapaivei fir) irporepov ftaXXeaOai de/ieXtov
tov /3ovX6fievov iripyov olKoBofieiv, irplv rj rr)v oi/celav 10 \oyio~ao~dai hvvap.iv Xva fir) Ba> T04? irapiovcri fivplas
a<f>opfia<; )(\.vao~ia'} Tt)<; et? airov. aW exeivq) fiev fie^pi
tov ye\(OTo<; r) %r)p.ta' evravOa Be r) KoXao-i<; irvp acrfteffrov, Kal o-Kw\r)% areXevTrjTO<{, Kal ftpvyfibs oBovtcov, Kal ct/coto? e^corepov, Kal to Bi%OTOfir)0rjvai, Kal to rayr)15 vat fieTa, t&v viroKptTmv. 3^8. AW' ovhev tovtwv eOeXovaiv IBelv ol KaTr)yopovvT<; r)fiS>v r) yap av eiravcravTO fi6fi<p6fievot tov ovk edeXovTa airoXeaffai fiarrrfv. 389. Ovk eariv r)p,lv virep oiKovofila<; irvpov rj xpiO&v, ovBe fSocbv Kal irpoftaTcov, ovBe irepl toiovtcov dXXa>v r) 20 o7ce\Jrt? r) trpoKeifikvr) vvv dXX' virep avTov tov o-dofiaTos tov 'Ir/cov. 39°- H yap eKKXtfala tov XpiffTov, Kara, tov fiaKapiov YlavXov, awfid e<iTi tov l£.pto~Tovm Kal Bel
tov tovto efnremcrrevfievov et? eve^iav avib iroXXrjv Kal KaXXo'i a/irfxavov if;ao~Keiv, iravTaypv irepiaKoirovvTa, fir] 25 irov oiriXoq, rj pvrl<;, r] ti<; aXXo<; fi&fio<; y toiovto? Tr)v &pav Kal ttjv evirpeireiav Xvfiaiv6fievo<; eKeivqv, Kal tL yap aXX' rj TJ79 eiriKeifiivrj? avTw Ke<f>aXrj<;, Trj<; aKifpcnov Kal

2 cvyeKa\a>sz || 10 avakoyiaaaBai yz vulg || 11 e»cet fiev fyz || 16 e$e\ovaiv eiSevai f || 18 virep] irepi yz vulg || 23 ep.iriffTevofievov yz ireiriaTev/ieyov vulg

8. p&\\. Sep..] ' to lay the founelation ' : Lat. iacere fundamentum. The allusion is to Lk. xiv 28.
12. irvp &.afleaTOv\ Cp. t6 irvp {xeivo iv 1 (note).
1 3. ppvynds 6S.] Matt, xxv 30. 20. <rei/»aT0S7-.'I.]i.e. theChurch:

cp. Col. i 24 (referred to in the following sentence) iirkp tov aii/iaros airov (Xpuyrov), 0 iarw r\ tKKki)ala.
25. ffjrlXos rj j>. kt\.] See Eph. v 27.
26. icoi rl yap a.W if] ' and in short.'

IV. n]

DE SACERDOTIO

109

fj,aicapia<;, a%iov avrb Kara Bvvap.iv rrjv dvdpwireiav diro(fxuveiv ; 391. Et yap tois irepi ttjv adXrjTiKrjv eveifiav ecnrovBaKocrt, Kal larp&v 'Xpe'ui Kal TraiBorpift&v, Kal Siaurris r)/cpt./3a>[iivr)s, Kal daKrjaewi avve'Xpv'S, Kal pvpLa? irapaTriprjaewt; erepas (Kal yap Kal to Tu%bv ev at/rot? 5 Trapocpdev irdvTa averpeyjre Kal KaTeftaXev)' 01 to a&p.a tovto Bepaireveiv \a%<We?, to rrjv dOXrjcnv ov 77-po? acofiara, dXXd 71730s Ta<; dopaTOV<; Swdfieis e%ov, 7rco? avTo BwrjaovTat <pvXaTTeiv aKepatov Kal vyies, firj iroXv Trjv dvdpanrivrjv virepftaLvovTes dpeTr/v, Kal irdaav i^ir^s 10 ·jrpoo-<popov iirio-Td/Mevoi OepaireLav ; III. 392. *H dy-
voels, OTi Kal trXeioai ttj<; r)p,erepa<; aapKos Kal vocrois Kal eiriftovkcus tovto viroKeiTai to oSifia, Kal Oolttov avTov (f>detpeTat, Kal a^oXaiTepov vyiaivei;
393. Kal toI<s fiev eKelva depairevovat to, o~mpaTa Kal 15 <papfj,aK(ov e^evprjTai iroiKiXia, Kal opydvoov Bidcpopoi KaTaaKeval, Kal Tpo(f>al toi<> vocrovo~i KaTaXXrjXor Kal <pvo~i<} Be deptov ttoXXuki1; rjpKeae fiovrj 77736? ttjv tov Kafivovros vyieiav ecrTi Be oirov Kal virvos irpoaireaatv els Kaipbv iravTos irovov dirriXXa^e tov laTpbv. 394- 'QvTavOa Be 20 ovSev tovtwv eTrivoijaai etrriv dXXa /Mia Tt? p-eTa Ta epya BeBoTai, /ATJxavrj Kal 6epairela<s 086?, r) Bia tov \6yov

10 iratjav ipvxris ktX.] a berl secutus sum tratrav ^«XV franc henr oliv vulg iratrav ^vxys (.deav wpoa. ewiar. deptHreveiv G (dav/xafav pro depaireveiv mn) tcjij if'vx'i) irpoo: eirior. Sepaireiav ceteri || 13 avrov\ + Ta /j.c\ri marg || 19 irpos Kcupov yz

3. ttoiSot/j.] ' trainers.' 5. rb tvx irop.] 'the neglect of a trivial detail ' : for rb rvxbv cp. T-qv TvxoOaav i 4 (note). 8. irpbs ras aop. Sw.] cp. contra eos qui subintr. habent virg. 243 E: also Eph. vi 12 r) ird\i)...irpbs ra irvevfiariKa ttjs Trovrjpias iv rots 4vovpaviois (quoted by Chrys. at ii 2). III. Thepreaching of the word of God is even more necessary now than

in the time of St Paul, who both by precept and by practice emphasized its importance.
13. ai5ro0] a construction ad sensum. Kirov refers to oapKbs (feminine), as though this were aihiuxros (neuter).
17. KaraXX.] 'suitable3: cp. noTaXXi)Xws ii 4 (note).
21. /iera t& tpya] Cp. /lera. rr/v x<£pi" iv 2 (note).

no

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. in

BvBaaicdXia. tovto opyavov, tovto Tpocpr), tovto depcov Kpdcri<! apltTTTj' tovto avTL cpapiidicov, tovto dvrl Trvpof, tovto dvTi criB-qpov icav icavcrat, Bey, icav Tetielv, TOVTtp Kej(pr)cr6ai, dvdyicq' icav tovto fir) y, irdvTa olyr/creTtu to. 5 \onrd. tovto) ical Keifievrjv iyelpofiev, ical <j>\eyfiaivovcrav KaTaaTeW.ofj.6v ttjv ^fvxjqv, ical to, trepiTTa irepticoirTOfiev, Ka\ to, XecirovTa irXr/povfiev, ical Ta dXXa 'diravTa epya^ofieda, 6o~a et? ttjv t?)? tyvyfi'; fffi.lv vyleiav crvvTeXei. 395 . IIpo? /J.ev yap (3Lov KaTacrTacriv dpiarrfv /St'o? eVepo? io el? tov Xcrov dv evaydyoi %f}\ov OTav Be irepl BoyfuiTa voo-fj r) -ifvyj) Ta v68a, "iroWrf tov Xoyov evravda r) yj>eia, ov ivpof ttjv t&v oiiceioov do~<f>dXeiav fiovov, dXXa ical 7r/>o? tou? egaOev iroXefiow;. 396. Et /j,ev yap e^ot, ti? ttjv iidy_aipav tov irvev/xaTos ical Ovpebv tricrTeax; toctovtov. 15 ft>? BvvacrdaL OavfiaTovpyelv, ical Bid t&v repacrTicov Ta t&v dvaicrxvvTcov ificfrpaTTeiv crrofiaTa, ovhev dv BeoiTo TJ75 dirb tov Xoyov /3or)0eia<}' fidXXov Be oiBe tot6 &%prfcrTOf 7] tovtov <f>vcrt<;, dXXa ical Xiav dvayicaia. 397- Kal yap 6 fiatcdpios IlauXo? ainbv iieTeyeiptcre, tcaiToi ye airo 20 t&v arffielmv iravTaypv 0avfj,a^6fievo<{. ical 6Tepo<: Tt? t&v air eicelvov tov xopov irapaivel TavTr/s imfieXeicrdat, Tr)<s Bwdfiewi, Xeycov ' "TLtoiiioi, 777)0? d-rroXoyiav iravrl Tt»

3 teat re/ieiy z vulg || 4 x/jtjctScu c xpTjcracr&u y vulg || fiijdev urxwni, jravTa oixercu cf vulg || 6 Kat ret \uirovra Tr\y}povfiev kcu ra 7repiTra
TTpiKOTTOfj.ep f || io ay evayoi cf av £17(1701 yz [| 19 avro z || 22 erot/xot] + yiveaSe z vulg (70'eo'cloi cy)

1. Upur itpacrts] 'climate': cp. Kpdtreois twv wp&v vi 6.
3. Kav<rai....Tiietv"\ Cp. ii 2 Bran Kavaai kt\. (note).
5. <p\eyii. KaratrT.] The phrase recurs in vi 12: tox^us 7A0 aiVTjK (sc. rrjv Kapdiav) <p\cy/j.aii>ov<rai> KaTaaHWonev.
9. /S(o! Irepos] i.e. the life of another.
13. To&tyiAm CiM ve- con" troversies with Jews, *he'sts> an<*

heretics. 14. fi&xaipav t. x. kt\.] Eph.
vi 13 sqq. For the general sense of the passage cp. Greg. Naz. dt se ipso et in episcopos 199 sqq.
16. ipfpaTT-ew crrA/aaTo] Cp. ifuppaTTeiv ra crTo/iara iii 16 (note).
20. Irep6t tis] St Peter. This way of referring to Peter shews that Chrys. regarded him simply as primus inter pares.
22. tVoi/toi] 1 Pet. iii 15.

IV. Ill]

DE SACERDOTIO

III

alrovvri vfid<; Xoyov irepl rrj<! iv vfilv e\7riSo?. Kal TrdvT<; Se 6/mov Tore St oiiBev erepov to?? 7rept "^Tecpavov ttjv tSsv ^rjpSsv iirerpeyjrav otKovofiuav aXX r) Iva ai/Tol rj) tov Xoyov 0"xp\d^wffi Sia/coina. 39^- IIXi)i» ov irapairXTj<rica<i avrbv iiri^r/Triaofiev, ttjv dirb twv o-r//j,eicov ej(pvTe<; 5 lo"Xyv. el Se Tr/9 p,ev hwdfiew; eKevvr)<; oiiBe t^vo? vTroXeXenrTat, ttoXXoI 8e iravra^odev i<peaTrjKaa iv oi voXefuoi koX o-vve%el<;, tovto) Xoiirov 17/40:9 dvdyicr) <ppdrTeo-6ai, Kal iva p,r) /3aX\d>p.e6a rot? twv e^dpfov fieXecri, Kal iva /3a\Xoifiev etcelvow;. IV. 399. A16 iroXXrjv j(prj Troielo-dai, 10 ttjv airovSrjv, &cne tov Xoyov tov Xpio-roi) iv rjp.lv evoiKelv ·jrXovalws. oil yap 7rpo<{ ev r)pXv elBos p,d%r)<; r) irapaaKevrjaXXd TrobKiXos ovtos o 7roXe/io<i, ical e« Sia<j>6pwv ovyxpoTovfievos twv e%0p£>v ox)Te yap oirXoi<; airavTes xp&VTai Tot? ai/Tois, ovTe evl Trpoo-fiaXXeiv r//uv fie/ieXerf/cacn 15 TpoTro). 400. Kal Set tov fieXXovTa Ttjv irpbs 7rdvTa<; dvaBe-^eaOai p,ayr)v rds dirdvTwv elhevau Te%vav Kal tov ai/Tov to%6tt)v Te elvat Kal a^>evhovrjTr)v, Kal Tal^iapypv Kal Xo%aydv, Kal crTpaTid)Trjv Kal GTpaTr\ybv, Kal iretpv Kal iirvea, Kal vavfid^r/v Kal Teiypp.d'fflv. 40 1. 'E7rt fiev 20

4 ffxoXao-wffi cf || h-Xt;? o\V ovde yz vulg || 6 u7roXenreTai vulg || 8 km tva] + iMiWov yz vulg || II tou 8cov f || 12 eiSos r/fuv z vulg || 17 avexcvOat c || 18 aipcySovurrrir c franc || 20 vavfiaxv *<" T«X°/iaX,)>'] cgrw secutus sum rav/tax*1" Ktu Teix<V<*Xe"' af'P sm ~ov ~ov ceteri

2. Toij irepl St.] Acts vi 1 --6. 6. oiSi Ixfot faroX.] For the somewhat inconsistent attitude of Chrys. towards the miracles which were frequently alleged to occur at the time see Puech pp. 173-- 175. Chrys. usually lays down an absolute difference between the apostolic age and his own, holding that miracles were formerly needed but are so no longer : but he does not definitely refuse to believe the stories of contemporary miracles. IV. The defender of the Church must be able to meet the attacks of

her enemies whenever and wherever delivered. Chrys. names some of the heresies against which special precautions must be taken. In avoiding one heresy, there is often a danger offalling into its opposite.
II. riv \byov r. Xp. kt\.] Col. iii 16.
13. avyKpor.] lit. 'welded, or hammered together ' : hence, with ix, ' composed of.'
20. vavpAxn*] The form in -171 is supported by the analogy of iviopAxni, novon&xv, etc. At vi 1 2 Kal Vwieiwr Kal rav/taxur, the accent

112

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. iv

yap twv (rrpaTuoTiKmv iroXificov, ev eicacrrof epyov diro\a/3a>v, tovtio tow etriovTa*; dfivverar evTavda Be tovto ovk eaTLV, aKkd av firj 77-ao-a? eTrio~Tdfj.evo<; rj t»;? re^vr)? to? ISea? 6 fieWcov vik&v, oiBev 6 StaySoXo? Kai Bi «/o? 5 fiepovs, orav i)p.eXr)p,evov rv%r], tovs ireipard<; eloayayibv tou? avTov, Biaptrdo-ai rd TrpoftaTcr dXX, ov%, orav Bid Trdat]<i ijKovra t^9 eino-rrifir)^ tov iroifieva aio-0r)Tai, Kai ra? if7rir3ovXa<; avrov tfaXeo? eirio-Tdfievov. 402. A16 xprj /caXco? e£ oXwv (ppaTTeadai tS>v fiepwv. teal yap 7ro'Xi? 10 6W? fiev av iravTa-xoOev TrepifteftXTifievr) rvyydvy, KaTayeXa twv irokiopicovvTwv apTrjv, ev dacpaXeia, pAvovcra iroXXfr idv Be irvXiBos fiovov rt? fierpov Bia/coyfrr) to Tei\o<s, ovBev avrfj Xoiirbv 8<pe\o<; tov TrepifioXov yiverai, /cairoi ye tov Xoittov jra-VTos aacpaXw<; eo~Tr)KOTo<;. owtw? ovv Kai 1) tov IS Oeov 770X1?' OTav p,ev aiiTqv iravTa'ypdev dvTi Teij(pv<; f] tov iroifievot dyj^ivoia re ical o~vvecri<i irepifiaXXr), irdvTa et? alo~-)(yvr)v Kai yeXuna Tot? i%0pois ra firi^avrj/juiTa TeXevTa, Kai fievovaiv 01 KaTOiKOvvTef evBov dcivels' OTav Be Tt? aiiTrjv K fiepovs KaTaXvo~ai Bvvrjdrj, Kav p,r) -rrdaav 20 KaTaftaKj), Bid tov fjApovf dtrav (&>? eltreiv) Xvfia'iveTai to Xoiirov. ti yap, otov 7Tpo? "EXXr/i/a? fiev dycovi&Tai

1 oiok eicaaTos av epyov airo\a^ y' vulg || 8 eirtoTap,evov] + ajraaai fz vulg || ii om ai/rTjp yz || fievov<ra] Tvyxavovaa. c || 15 oran y.ev aw-g 77... cvveait, ire/x/SaXXei iravras yz || 18 evSoiev f || orav] + \onrov y

on vavpaxdv in cod. Augustanus points to vavpAxtt, n°t vavudxos. Teixo^XV^ (-<*> in Doric) occurs Ar. Achar. 570.
6. to irpdfiaTa.] The metaphor changes.
id. 810 iria. 1)K. t. i.~\ 'to be well equipped with knowledge ' : cp. the Attic phrases Jid fi&xv*> &' &pyvs i]Keu> (levcu).
12. 7rv\idos...iJi4Tpo3>~\ ' the breadth f a postern-gate? For the metaphor cp. iv 7 uarepybp reixos, oStu tcis... iKK\ri<Tlas rd rofrrov Teix'fei yp&nfiara.

13. /cairoi ye.. .tor.] For Kalroiye with a participle instead of a finite verb cp. vi 12 koItm ye tUv jrapofuvbvTwv ovk ovtuv. So koItol at vi 9. Classical Greek would have used xalirep.
14. rj tov 8eov jr.] Ps. lxxxvii 3 etc.
*'· rl ybp Star kt\.] With this list of the opponents of Christianity cp. Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. p. 2 (ed. Srawley).
ii. "EXXijkos] who held polytheistic views.

IV. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

113

koKcos, avkoxri Be avTr)v lovBaloi; rj tovtwv /lev dfi,<pOTepmv Kparfj, dpirdfacri Be M.avi%aloi ; rj fiera to trepiyeveadat, Kai tovtwv, oi ttjv eifiapfievrjv elo~dyovTe<; evBov eo~To>Ta to, irpofiaTa KaTaa<f>a.TT(oai ; Kai ti Bel Trdo~a<> KaTaXeyeiv tov Biaf36\ov Ta? alpicreis ; a? av fir) nrdaa'i 5 diroKpovecrOai Ka\a><; 6 troifir)v ei'877, BvvaiT av Kai BicL fjua<; to, ir\elova t&v -rrpofiaTav KaTa<f>aye2v o \vkos. 403. Kai eirl fiev t&v o~TpaTieoT&v, dirb t&v eo-T&Tatv Kai fMa^o/ievav Kai ttjv VLKrjv eaecrOai Kai Tr)v r/TTav irpocrBoKcLv del XPV' evTavffa Be ttoXv TovvavTiov. iroWaKis yap r) 10 irpb<; eTepovs fidyr) tow ovBe ttjv dp^rjv avp.^aX6vra^ ovBe iroveo~avTa<; okam r)crv^d^ovTa<; Kai Ka6r)p,evov<; viKrjaai TreiroirjKe' xal tw otVet&J tji<f>ei Trepnrapel<; 6 fir) iroWrjv irepl TavTa Ttjv i/nretplav e~)(a)v, Kai tok <f>L\oi<; Kai tois 7ro\6|ttot? KaTayekao-TO<i ylveTai. 404. Otov (ireipdaofiai 15 yap croi Kai eirl "irapaBeiyfiaTOs, 0 \eyca, iroirjaai (j)avepbv) tov virb tov 6eov BoBevTa tw Mawa-?} vofiov oi tt)v OvaXevTivov Kai MapKicovos BiaBe^dfievoi <ppevo/3Xd/3eiav, Kai

1 avrov c vulg || 2 xparei vulg || juera 5e to Trcpiyev. vulg || 4 atfxLTTuiai vulg || 12 Tjo-uxofoxTOs] + tie yz vulg || 14 rots 71-oXc/t.] tois evavnois f || 18 8e!-a.fivoi yz

1. 'IouSaioi] who were monotheists. There was a large colony of Jews at Antioch: see Chrys. adv. Iudaeos ; Puech pp. 1 86 sqq.
2. Mocixaioi] These believed in
two creative principles, one good, the other evil. The founder of the sect, Manes, was born about 240 and died about 277: see T. R. Glover Life and Letters in the Fourth Century p. 200 ; DCB s.v.
3. ttiv el/iap.] 'fate,'1 'destiny.' The reference is to the Stoics, against whom Chrys. wrote six Homilies (de fato et providentia). See also Greg. Nyss. contra fatum. The practice of consulting astrologers was due to fatalistic tenets: adv. oppugn, vit. nwnast. Ill 92 E ir69(v 6 iroXus iravTaxov rijs elfw.p/j^yrjs

X0705; irhBev tiarpuv dXo-yif) ipopq. rd trra ivanBiaaiv 0! xoXXoi;
13. rt# oUei<p {.] like Aias in Sophocles : Introduction p. xxxiii.
16. he\ irapaS.] ('in,' i.e.) 'by
an illustration.' 17. OtfaX.] Valentinus (flor. 140)
rejected the Law of Moses because it derived its origin from the God of the Jews. Val. represented the speculative side of Gnosticism, Marcion (see next note) its practical side (Stephens),
18. Map*.] Marcion (flor. 150) held that the God of the Law and the Prophets was not the Father of Jesus Christ. See the Index Rerum in the Benedictine edition, and DCB s.v.

N. C.

8

114

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. IV

oaoi ra avra voaovaiv etceivois, tov KaraXoyov t&v deUav eKfidXkovcri ypa<f>&v. 'lovBaloi Be ainov ovtoo Tifi&o~iv, a>? Kal tov Kaipov kcoXvovtos <f>iXoveiKe2v airavra (ftvKaTTeiv, irapa to t^3 Bern Bokovv r/ Be eKKXrjo-ia tov deov, Trjv 5 d/jb(f>OTepcoi> afieTpiav (f>vyovera, fiecrrjv efidSiae, Kal ovts viroKelaQai ai)Tov tw %vya> ireLOeTai, ovre BiaftdWeiv avTov dve%eTai, dWd Kal tre'Kavp.kvov eiraivet Sid to Xpr)o~i/J,evo-ai irore et? Kaipov. 4°5- Act 8?; tov fieWovra 7T/30? dfji<f>oTepov<; fid^ecrdai Trjv o-v/u.fieTpiav elBivai TavTriv. io av Te yap 'lovSaiow: BiSd^ai f3ov\6fievo<{, w? ovk iv Kaipm t^s ira\aia<; fyovTai vo/Aodecria<;, dp^r/rai KaTtjyopelv avTrji d<f>eiB&<;, eBwKe Tot? Biaavpeiv /3ov\op.evoi<; t&v alpeTiK&v Xa/3rjv ov fiiKpdv av Te tovtov; evioTO/iierai awovBd^av d//,eTpa><; avTov etralprf, Kal a>9 dvayKaiov iv t& irapovTi IS TvyydvovTa Oav/jid^rj, to t&v 'lovBaiav dve<p^e aTOfiaTa. 406. UdXiv oi Trjv 2,a/3eWiov fiaivofievoi fiaviav, Kal oi Ta 'Apeiov \vtt&vts, el; afieTpiav d/ACpoTepoi TJ79 vyiovt

1 voovtriy y' || 5 <pevyo\i<ra c vulg || e/SoSiire] + rnv oSov c || 6 ra X070) y || 7 weiravfi.a'ov] + avrov f || 8 Set Se cfyz || 12 twv aiper.] cupenkois f

1. KcLTa\6yov] 'canon.' 5. iiiariv tJ3d5.] 'steered a middle course.' For the general sense of the passage cp. Greg. Nyss. Or. Cat. p. 2. We are reminded of the phrase ' to keep the mean between the two extremes ' (Preface to the PrayerBook), describing the policy of the Church of England in regard to reform. 8. xpWril1'] ' to be serviceable': a word condemned by Phrynichus (Lobeck 386), but used by Theophrastus, Diodorus, and Lucian. 12. rots Siaa. |8. t. oi.] 'to those heretics who wish to attack it.' 13. ^tioto/u.] 'to silence': cp. iv 5, 8: Tit. i 11. 14. iiraipy] 'praise.' 16. 2o/Se\\(ou] This passage seems to be modelled on Greg. Naz.

de fuga cxxxvii. On Sabellius see Gwatkin Arian Controversy p. 9. S. ' had reduced the Trinity to three successive manifestations of the one God in the Law, the Gospel, and the Church.' His doctrines were condemned by a Council held at Rome in 263.
17. 'Apefov] See Gibbon c. xxi ; Gwatkin op. tit., and Studies of Arianism. Arius (whose doctrines were condemned at the Council of Nicaea in 325) held that our Lord Jesus Christ had a beginning of existence, and was not of the very substance of the Supreme God. For the subsequent attitude of Chrys. towards the Arians, who were powerful at Constantinople, see Puech p. 205.

IV. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

115

e^errecav Trio-remv Kal rb fikv ovopa ~X.pio~riavS)v dfuporepot<} eTTtKeirai, el Be rt? rd Boyfiara e^erdcreie, tou? fiev ovBev a/ieivov 'lovBalcav Biaieeifiivovs evprjo-ei, irXrjv ocrov inrep ovofidrcov Bia<j>epovrai fibvov, tov? Be vroWrjv rrjv i/Mtfiepeiav 77790? ttjv aipecnv YiavXov rod "Za/j.ocraria><i 5 e^ovraf, dfuporepovs Be rr)<; d\i)deia<i eKros. 407. IToXu? ovv Kavravda o KivBvvo?, Kal o-revr) Kal reffXifi/ievrj j) 6Bb<;, r) vtto /cprjfiv&v dfuporepcodev dtreiXr)fifjLevrf Kal Beos ov p.LKpov, fir) rbv erepov rt? Oekwv ftakelv vtto Oarepov ·7r\ijyfj. dv re yap fdav ri? etirr) deorrjra, 77-/30? rr)v 10
eavrov rrapdvoiav evOewf e'iKicvcre rr)v (pcovrjv 6 2ay8e\\to?* av Te BieKrj irdXiv, erepov fiev rbv irarepa, erepov Be rbv vlbv, Kal rb irvev/Ma Be rb dytov erepov Xeycov, efyearrjKev "Apeios, et? irapa\\ayr)v ova-[a<; eKKoiv ri)v iv Tot? irpoad)7rot? Bia<j>opdv. Bel Be Kal rr)v dcrefir) avyxycnv eKeivov, 15 Kal rr/v fiaviwBr) rovrov Buaipeaiv dTroo-rpi<f>eo-dai Kal (f>evyetv, rr)v fiev deorrjra irarpbs Kal vlov Kal dyiov Trveifiaro<; fiiav ofioXoyovvras, Trpoo-TiOevras Be ra? rpel?

2 et Se rii\ + a\rrwy fz || ra Soy/iara] + axpifias yz || 6 ttoXus 5e KavravBa y ird\vs KavTav8a z || 8 1\ vtto Kpr/p-vuv] om i\ cyz || eireCkr\p.p.evi) a || 11 irapoiviav cfy' vulg wapavo/uav by*z henr || 13 erepov} + ea/ai vulg || 16 dicup. airo<pevyeiv y || 18 kcu rets rpeis y vulg

3. ir\ijv 8<rov ktX.] The Jews hold that there is one God, the Father. The Sabellians speak of God as being of one Person, but having three names (dvo/iaoLat, faroordVeis). Thus Sabellians and Jews are practically in agreement : for the Sabellians, whatever they may profess to the contrary, in effect reduce the three Persons of the Trinity to one.
5. IlariXoi; t. 2.] Bishop of Antioch ; he held that Jesus Christ was not God, but man. His opinions were condemned by a Council which met in 269: Gwatkin Arian Controversy p. 33.
7. arevi) k. re$\.] Cp. Matt.

vii 14. 8. d7reiXij/i/t^] lit. ' cut off '
i.e. abruptly ended: cp. Thuc. iv 102 relxei. ixaKpif airoXa^iiv, 'walling off.'
14. els irapaWay^v kt\.~\ ' perverting the difference of the Persons so as to mean a change in the substance.' Jlpocurov = U7r6<rra<ris : see next note,
18. ras rp. far.] See Gwatkin Arian Controversy p. 113. 'Tjt4araots (originally equivalent to oicrta or ' essence,' and so used by Athanasius) had come to be used of the Persons of the Trinity : cp. BethuneBaker in Texts and Studies vol. vii n. 1 p. 75.
8--2

Il6

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. iv

vrroardo-eif ovtco yap drrorei^Lcyat, 8vvr)<r6fie6a ras dp,<f>orepav e<f)68ov<;. 408. IloWa? Se Kal eripa<; ivr)v croc Xeyeiv <rvfnr\oKa.<;' rrpot a? av firj yevvaia><; ri<; Kal aicpi/8w? p.dyyrai, p.vpia Xafiwv drreiai rpavp.ara. V. 409. Tt 5 <xi/ rt? eliroi to.? r&v oiKeicov e'peo-^eXia? ; ov yap elcriv eXdrrov; avrai ru>v e^a>0ev irpoo-fioXaiv, dXXa ical rrXeiova rm BiBdcrKovri irape%ov<7iv IBpcora. oi fiev yap vrvb iroXvirpayfioavvT)';, oTrXai? Kal ecKrj, irepiepyd^eaOai 0eXovaiv, a p,rjTe p,a0ovrd<; iari Kephdvai pJ]re fiaOelv Bvvarov. 10 erepoi irdXiv r&v rov 6eov Kpip,drcov ev0vva<> avrbv drrat,rovctv, Kal ttjv a^vcraov rrjv iroXXrjv dvap,erpelv /3tat,ovrav Ta yap Kpipiard gov, <fyr)o~lv, aj3vo~o-o<{ iroXXi]. 410. Kat rrlarecos p,ev rrepi Kal ·jroXireia<;, 0X170115 av
evpoi? <rirovBd%ovTa<;' toiis Be rrXei,ov<; ravra rreptepya^o15 fievow; Kal ^qrovvra<;, a pyre evpelv Bvvarbv Kal rbv 0ebv
rrapo^vvei frrovpeva. orav yap, d-nep avrbs rip.a<i oxik r)6iXr)<T6v elBevai, ravra ftia^aificOa puav0dveiv, ovre elo~6p,e0a (7rw? yap, 0eov fxr) fiovXofiivov ;) Kal rb KivBvveveiv 7)p2v K rov fyrelv rrepiecrrai p,6vov. 41 1. 'AW' op.w<; Kal 20 rovrav roiovrcov ovrcov, orav rts fierd av0evria<; emo-rofii^D tou? to drropa ravra epevv&vras, dirovoia<s re Kal apaOlas eavrw rrpoo-erpi^raro B6%av. Bid ^prj Kavrav0a ·jroXXf) Ke%pf)o-0ai ry avveaei, a>? Kal dtrdyeiv r&v droirwv

5 "Keyoi y vulg || 8 (piKoirpaypuxTwiis f || 1 6 owe cf3ov\ri$ii adcvut f || 18 rov Beov z vulg || 21 Ta airopprjTa cf franc oliv || 23 xp1?o"<*o'0<u f II airayeiv] + avrovs yz vulg

V. The bishop must be able to dispose of difficulties, in regard to points of doctrine, which may be raised by other Christians.
5. ipe<r.J epe<7xijXeiy (-xeX«>") ' to banter ' is used by Plato. The substantive is not found in classical Greek. It is here used in the more general sense of 'contention, "strife.'
8. irepiepy.~\ Cp. below irepiepyafrfitvtws xal i'Trrow'Tas: also Chrysostom's language on the subject of the 'AybjMioi : de incomprehensibili 447 E.

12. to. y&p kt\.]Fs. xxxvi (xxxv) 6. 13. TroXirelas] ' life ' : cp. iv 6 rijv irokiTelav ttjv dyye\iKi^y, iv o rrji iroXiTeios 5te<j>8apntvris. 20. abdevrlas] 'power': cp. aiBevrias Hi 10 (note), ib. ^jriiTTO/iifj] Cp. iwiffTOfilaat iv 4 (note), 21. dirov. ktX.] ' attaches to himself a reputation for arrogance and ignorance.' For irpoaeTpi\j/aro see on duirdas ktK. iii 18.

IV. v]

DE SACERDOTIO

WJ

epioTqcrecov tov nrpoeaTWTa, Kal to? elprjp,eva<; etcfpevyeiv atrial. 412. TIpoi airavra Be ravra erepov fiev oiBev, fj Be tov \6yov ftorjdeia BeBoTai povrj- icav Tt? TaxiTt)^ dtre<TTepi)/j.evo<; 17 tt)? Swa/netc;, 01/Bev ap.ei.vov t&v ^eifia^ofievcov nfKolwv 8t,r)ve/ca><; at yfrv^al r&v vtf aiiTw Terayp,ev<ov 5 dvBp&v BiaKeiaovTai, t&v do~0eveo~Tepa>v Kal ireptepyorepmv \67<b. Bio %pr} rov lepea irdvra iroielv vtrep tov TavTiyv KTrjcraaOai, tt)v la^vv. VI. 413. Tt ovv 6 HavXos, <f>T)0-iv, ovk eo-trovBaae raiiTrjv ol KaTopQaOrjvai ttjv dpeTrjv ; ovBe eyKaXvirTeTai eVt tjJ tov \6yov irevia, aKKa, 10 Kal BiapprjBrjv ofioXoyel lBia>Tr)V eavTov eivar Kal TavTa K.opiv0ioi<; iirio-TeXkcov, Tot? d-jro tov Xeyeiv 6avpa£op,evoi<;, Kal peya eirl tovtq <f>povovo-i. 414. Tovto yap, ecpijv, tovto ianv, b tov<: TroW.ov<s dirwkeo-e, Kal padvpoTepow; 7T/30? ttjv dXrjdrj BiBaaKaXlav eTroirjcre. prj yap Bvvr)6evTe<: 15 a«/otySw? i^erdaai t&v aTroo-ToXtK&v (ppevdov to fidOos, firjBe avvelvai ttjv twv prjpaTcov Bidvoiav, BieTe\eo-av top airavTa %povov vvo-Ta£ovTe<i Kal yao~p.a>p,evoi, Kal ttjv dp.a6iav np,wvT<{ TavTtjv, ov% rjv 6 IlaOXd? <pr)o-iv elvac dp,adr)<;, dtt' ^9 too~ovtov direl')(ev, oaov ovBe a\Xo<; Tt? 20

TCOV VTTO TOV OlipaVOV TOVTOV dvOpWTTCOV. A^S- 'AXX'
ovtoi p,ev fjp,a<} ei? Kaipbv 6 Xoyo<} peveTW Tew? Be eKeivo

5 vtt1 avrov fa il 9 om 01 vulg Tavrrjv txoi cz || 13 eiri tovto vulg [j 14 a7ro\w\eKe cfyz || 15 irpos] irepi yz vulg || 7rexoiijKC fz || 17 ffvvievai yz vulg || 22 owa/ievera y

VI. St Paul was not (as is sometimes thought) indifferent to the power of the spoken word. On the contrary, he developed this power assiduously in his own case, with splendid results to the Church.
The encomium pronounced on St Paul in this and in the following chapter may have been suggested by Greg. Naz. de fuga lii --lvi. In many other passages, however, Chrys. manifests the admiration which he felt for St Paul: see the references in the Index Rerum of

the Benedictine edition. 9. KaropO.] ' to be successfully
attained7: cp. o~(jj<ppo<ruvi]v Karopdwcrai adv. oppugn, vit. monast. HI 95 c. 0! = airrf.
10. o68e iynaK.]' is not ashamed.' 'EyicaKvirTeadai is, literally, 'to cover one's face, ' in token of shame or grief.
n. lhuim\v\ 1 Cor. xi 6. 12. tois djrd t. X. 0.] See 1 Cor. xii-- xiv. 19. -qv . . .&tw.6fy] i.e. fjv (&iw0lav) ...djitoS^s, a cognate accusative.

Il8

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. vi

<f>i)fu' BSfiev avrov eivai ISmottjv tovto to fiepos, oirep ovtoi ftovXovTai, ri ovv tovto Trpov tow vvv ; 416. 'E«eti>o? fiev yap elyev la^vv iroXXw tov Xoyov fiel^ova ical irXeiova Swafievqv KdTopdovv <f>aiv6fievo<; yap p,ovov, 5 teal aiymv, toIs haifiocriv TjV <po/3epd$- ol 8e vvv iravres ofiov crweXdovTes fi6Ta fivpimv ei5%(Si' ical Saicpvcov ovk av Bvvr)8elev, oaa 'ia^vo-e to, o-i/MiKiv0ia TlayXov iroTe. 417. Kat ITaOXo? fiev ev^o/ievo? veKpoii<s dviaTr), Kal aXXa eOavfiaTovpyet TOiavTa, a>? Kal <?eo? vofiio-Orjvai irapa Tot? 10 e^o>9ev ical irplv rj tov fiiov p,eTaarTr)vai tovtov, KaTtfgi(io0T) dpirayfjvai ea><s TpiTov ovpavov, ical pr/fiaTCov /iTaayeiv, (Sv 0x1 64fii<; dvdpanreLav dicovo-ai (pvcriv. ol Se vvv ovt<s--dXX' ov&ev )3ovXo/Aai 8vo-)£epe<; eltreiv ovBe j3apv% ical yap ical Tavra ovk eTre/iftaivcov avTols Xeyco vvv, aX\d 15 davfid^asv,-- 7ra)9 ov (ppiTTOva-iv dvBpl ttjXikovtw irapa/SaXXoire? kavTom ; 418. Wiyap KalTa6ai>fiaTad<pevTe<}, iirl tov fiiov eXdoifiev tov fiaicaplov, ical tt)v iroXiTelav e^eTaaaifiev avTOv tt)v dyyeXiKtjv, ical ev TaiiTrj paXXov, rj ev toIs o-rifieioi's, oyfrei vitctavTa tov ddXr/Trjv tov H.pio~Tov. 20 ti yap av Tt? ettroi tov %f)Xov, tt)v i-irielicetav, Toiis o-we^et? Kivhvvov;, Ta<; eTraXXrfXov; <f>povTi,8a<;, Ta? dSiaXeiTTTovs virep twv eKKXrjo-iwv ddvfuas, to irpb<; tovs ao-#ej/et9 avfi7raOe<;, ra? TroXXas dXiyfrei<;, tou? naivoTepovs SicoyfjLovs, Toi><; Ka6rjfj,epivov<i davaTov; ; ri? yap t6tto<; tt)<} oIkov-

2 avrot yz vulg || 4 (fMUvo/xevos] + pey yz vulg |] 11 pr)pjiTuv a/covaai wv ov Be/us avOp. /ieTouxf"" <pvai.v c || 13 ovSev Swdficu vulg || 19 tov Seov yz

7. oifunii>8ia] 'aprons' (from the Latin semicinctium). It is the word used by St Luke (Acts xix 12) in describing the miracles wrought by St Paul at Ephesus.
9. 8e6i vo/i.] Acts xiv 12. 11. apway.] 2 Cor. xii 2. 17. 7roX<Tt(ai'] Cp. iro\LTttas iv 5 (note). 21. KwSivovs] 2 Cor. xi 26. ib. iiraKki(Kovi]' constant.'

22. inrcp twv (kk\. iS.] 1 Cor. xi 28.
ib. irpbs toi)s &a6.~] 1 Cor. ix 12 : 2 Cor. xi 29.
24. KaSrj/i. 8oiiA.tovs] 1 Cor. xv 31.
ib. ris yip tAttos ktX.] This bears a singular resemblance to Vergil Aen. i 459 : quis tarn locus, inquit, Achate, quae regio in terris nostri nan plena /aborts ?

IV. .vi]

DE SACERDOTIO

119

/X.6M7?, tvoia rjireipos, iroia OdXarra tov Biicalov tow? adXow; T)<yvoi)crev ; eicelvov ical f) o.oikt)to<; e-yvw, KivBvve-6ovra Be^afievr) 7roXXa«t?. irav yap eiBos inrefieivev eiri/3ov\i]<}, real irdvra rpoirov eirfjXde viler)?, ical ovre dycovi£6fievo<; ovre o-Te<f>avovp.evot; BieXnre irore. 419. 'AXXa 5

yap ovk olBa 77-W9 irpo-q-yd-qv vfipl^eiv tov dvBpa. to, yap KaropOdtfiara avrov iravTa fiev virepfiaLvet, \6yov tov Be rjfj^Tepov, toctovtov oaov ical r///,a<; ol \eyeiv elBoTes. irXr/v dWd ical ovrcos (ovBe yap airo rrj<; iK/3do~ew<;, aXX' airb T^? ·Kpoaipka-ems f)/j,a<; 6 /iaicdpio<; Kpivei) ovk airoa-Trfcrofiai, 10

eo)? av eXiTon tovto, b tooovto t&v elprjfievav KpeiTTOv eo-Tiv, oaov airavroov dvOpcoircov etcelvo<;. 420. Tt ovv tovto io-Tiv ; p.eTa TocavTa icaTopOcbfiaTa, /aera Toil? fivpiovs a-Te<pdvov<;, Tjv^aro et? yeevvav direXdelv, ical ala>via> TrapaSoOrjvai KoXdaei, virep tov tov? 7roXXa«t9 avTov 15 ical XiOdo-avTas, ical dve\6vTa<;, to ye avrwv fiepos, 'lovBaiovs acodfjvai ical t&> XjOktto) irpocreXOelv. rt? ovtgj? eTroOrjcre tov XpicrTov ; etye iroOov ai)Tov Bet icaXeiv, dXX' ou% erepov ti tov ttoOov ifXeov. 421. "Et' ovv eat/Tov? iiceivq) TrapafiaXovfxev, fiera, rr/v Too-avTijv %dpiv, fjv e\a/3ev 20 dvoodev ; fieTa tt/v ToaavTi]V apeTr)v,rjv oiKoOev eireBei^aTO ; ical tl tovtov yevoiT av ToXfvrjpoTepov ; 422. "Ort Be ovBe ovt(d<; r)v lBia>TT)<;, &>9 ovtoi vo\l'iX,ovo~i, ical TOVTO Xonrbv diroBel^ai ireipdo-ofiai. 423. Ovtoi p,ev yap ov /iovov tov ovk fjO-icr\fievov tt)v t&v e%w6ev Xoycov TepBpelav 25

1 tov SiKaiov] + tovtov yz vulg || 2 om KivSvvevovra c |] 10 Kplvei y vulg ||

11 tooovtv) . . .oaa z || 23 ovx ovtws fyz |] 25 fwvw cz

2. dok.] 'uninhabited'1 (sc. yrj)

21. oUodev] ('from,' i.e.) '»'»

= tprHM>s. The reference seems to be to Acts ix 23, 29 : for the visit to Arabia (Gal. i 17) is apparently excluded by the word KivivvdiovTa.
9. £Kfi6.a£ti)s\ ' result.'' Hpoaip. = ' intention.'
14. 7)fl|aTo eis 7. kt\.] Rom. ix 3: cp. iji5x6yuijc iii 7 (note).
16. to ye avTwv nipos] Cp. t6 ye piipos rb abv iv 1 (note).

himself: cp. ovk it\ov otxoSev, 'of my own,' Ar. Pax 522. In iii 6 sub fin. we found Svvd/uws ftai t^s wap' airrov nal ttjs avtadev.
25. tov ovk i)<r. kt\.] ' who is not practised in profane (secular) rhetoric.' ItpBpcla ('clap-trap') is said to be an abbreviated form of TepaTela.

120

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. VI

IBkotijp KaXovcriP, dXXd ical top ovk elBoTa iidyeadai inrep t5>v rfj<s d\r}6eia<; Boyp,dT03v · ical ica\a><; vopitpvcyiv.

6 Be TJavXo<; ovk ev d/j.(f>oTipoi<; e<f>i)<rev IBmott)? elvai, dXX' ev Oareptp fiovov Kal tovto dcr<paXi£6p,epo<; top hiopi.ap.bv 5 dtcptfiw ireiroirirai, Xeyiop ra> Xoycp lBicorrj<i eipai, aU' ov ttj ypwaei. 424. E70) Be el p,ep ttjp XeioTrjTa 'lo-otcpdrow; diryrovp, Kal top Ai)p,oo-0evov<; oyxov, ical ttjv ®ovkvBlBov aepMOTTjTa, ical to HXaTcovof vyfros, eBei <pepeiv ei? /xecrov Tavrtjp tov liavXov ttjp fj.apTvpi.av. vvv Be etcelpa fiev 10 iraPTa d(pir)p,i, ical top Trepiepyop to>p e^coOep KaXXcoirio-fwp, ical ox/Bep fiot <f>pdo~eco<i, oiBe dirayyeXias fieXet,' a\\' e£eo-TO> ical ttj Xe^ei irrmj^eveip, ical ttjp ctvpQtjktjp t&v opo/MaTooP aTrXrjp Tiva elvai ical d<f>eXfj, fiovov fiij ttj yvdocrei Tt? ical Trj tcop BoyfiaTWP aKpifSelq IBi<ottj<; etrrw fiT/B" ipa 15 ttjp oliceiap dpyiap eiriKaXvyfrji, top fiaxapiop eicelpop d<patpeio-d<o to pAyio~Tov t&p dyaOwp, ical to t&p eyicmpiwp K<pdXaiov. VII. 425. TioOev yap, elire ftoi, Toil? 'IovSatou? o~vpe%ee tov? eV Aap.do-ic<p KaToiKovvTa<;, ovBeirco T&v o~Tjp,euov dp%dftevo<; ; irodev tow? 'EW^i/tcrnx? icaTe20 TraXaicre ; Bid tL Be et? Tapcrop e^eirepstreTO ; ovk iireiBr) Kara KpaTOt eviica to Xoytp, ical et? roaovTOp auTov?

6 T-qv XnytorriTa cy* || Su/fpoTous y || 7 excfijrow c || n c7ra77e\tos oliv airo\oyias aby*z || 16 tuv aperav {' to fteye0os two ayadoiv c

5. T(f \6yip kt\.] 2 Cor. xi 6. 6. tl...o\viyrovv\lifI demanded':
St Paul's admission that he was 'rude in speech' cannot properly be pressed save by those who expect from him the varied excellences of the great classical writers. It will be disregarded by those who set less value upon mere style.
id. XeiAnrra ktX.] Chrys. no doubt studied these authors while he was a pupil of Libanius. Aei6r. = ' smoothness,' 'polish,' shewn for example in the avoidance of hiatus between vowels (<f><avtiivTwv airyKpovais) : tyKov = ' weight ' : atpivbT. = ' dignity': <h(/os = ' sublimity.' It

may be observed that Suidas (s.v. 'ludyyrjs) attributes fi^os and \ei67-jjs
to the present treatise, de sac. 11. iirayy.] ' style,' ' expression.' 12. tj} X^{« irr.] ' to have a poor
(lit. beggarly) style ' : cp. Greg, Naz. de se ipso et in episc. 301 sqq., where it is maintained that simplicity is preferable to the elaborate style of Chrysippus, Plato, and others,
VII. Instances are quoted to skew the efficacy of St Paul's eloquence in converting souls to Christ.
18. aiWx«] Acts ix 22. 19. EXXj)i\] Acts ix 29. 20. els Tapcrdv] Acts ix 30.

IV. vii]

DE SACERDOTIO

121

rjXavvev, &>? Kal el<; <f>6vov irapo%vv9rivai, fir) <j)epovTa<; rrjv f/Trav ; evTavda yap ovSetrco tov OavpMTOvpyelv Tjp^aro. ovS' av e'xpi T19 elirelv, oti dirb rfjf irepl ra Tepdarta Sol^ry? davp,ao"vov ai/Tov r/yov 01 iroXXoi, Kal 01 /j,a%op,evoi 717)05 a&Tov dirb tj}? viroXrj^eaits eVr/ped^ovro rdvSp6<s. 5 Tew? yap dtrb tov Xeyecv /movov e/cpdrei. 426. II/jo? Se tov? lovSat^eiv etrij^eipovvTat; ev ' KvTio^eia irodev r)y<ovl%ero Kal avvefyJTet; 6 Se 'ApeoTrayiTrjs eKelvot, 6 T77? Seio-iSaifiovecrTdTTjs iroXeoof eKeivrjs, ovk dirb hr)fir)yop'ua<s fiovrjt; rjKoXovOrjaev axirw, fierd 777? yvvaiKOS ; 6 Se Et/- 10 tw^o? ttw? KaTeireaev dirb tjj? 6vpiSo<; ; ovk eireiSrj peyjpi y3a#ei'a? vvktos et? top rr)? StSaa/caXias avrov dirrjcr')(o\elro Xoyov ; 427. Tt Se ev ®eo~o-a\ovlicT) Kal iv K.oplvO<p ; tC Se ev 'E^>eo-&>, Kal ev avrfj rj? 'Vd>p.r) ; ov% 6'Xa? rjfiepas Kal vvKTai dvrjXio~Kev e<f>e^f]<; ei? rrjv e^rjyrjaiv twv ypa<f>a>v ; 15 Tt av Tt? Xeyot ra? 7TjOO? tov? 'ETriKovpeiov; StaXe^et? Kal ZiTcoikovs ', el yelp atravTa 6eXoifiev KaraXeyeiv, els pMKpbv eKireo-elrai f&fJKO<} o X070?. 428. orav ovv Kal trpb t&v o~r)p,ei(ov Kal ev //.ecroi? avrol<s <paivr)Tut 7roXX« /ee^p^/ieVo? T<p X07W, 7T&)? Tl TO\p,ljo-OVO-lV lSl(OT7jV ellTeiV, TOV Kal OTTO 20 tov SiaXeyeo-dai Kal Srjfiqyopeiv fidXiaTa 8avp,aa6evTa irapa Traai ; 429. AtA tL yap AvKaoves avTov vtreXaftov elvat, 'JLpfj.rjv ; to fiev yap 6eov<; avTovs vofito-dfjvai dirb
4 17701/] ijyovvTo abcyz franc henr vulg || 5 ijTnjpeafoxTo vulg || 12 avrovs awriax0^*1 (-v) Xo-yox cy* || 20 tov euro tou vulg || 22 irapa iravrwv y*z

4. 0avn. rryov] 'counted him as wonderfuP': cp. <paiikt)v ayeiv tt)v ypa(j>Tiv v 6.
5. diro t^s u7ro\. iir.J ' were overthrown merely by his reputation.' For i/toX. cp. tfiroXiji/'ewj i 4 (note).
7. 'AvTioxefp] Gal. ii 1 1 sqq. 8. 'ApeoTr. ] Dionysius : Acts xvii 34. 10. T?js ·yw, ] Damaris : Acts I.e.
The vetus interpres has cum uxore: and this is the natural meaning of ·ri}s 7wa«os here. St Luke's words

are simply Aiovi<rios...Kal yvvi) ivbfiari Ad/xa/HS : Ambrose, however, speaks of Dionysius Areopagites
cum Damari uxore sua (Ep. art Eccl. Vercell., quoted by Hughes).
ib. Etfrvxos] Acts xx 9. 12. d^ffx-] 'waj wholly engrossed' (from d7ra<rxoX«o"0ou, a word found in Lucian and Heliodorus).
16. 'Etik. Kal St.] Acts xvii 18. 22. AvKioves] Acts xiv 12.

122

50503

[IV. VII

  ·    ,   

, '   . 43°· /4          ;            5  ;   '  ,     '   ;       ;       ,         ·,               ,     ,      ) . 43 ' · '     ,          ·    

1 5     ,        ,            .    ,        ,    -
2  . 432· ^               ,          ,        ,   ,    ,
25        

 ' ] +    || 6    || 8  ] + !  1{* || 17 -    || 19     |] 23 °' ''  ;  

2.  ] 5 /.. :  ... » ,    6 !  .
. «  . . 4.] '  /   $!5   !?'   (*. *1  .  2    \ .

15-  .] 2 .  5·
8. '  . . ."\ ..   (   \.
24· ] ..  : .  .  2, &      6 3)0 (.).

IV. vii]

DE SACERDOTIO

1 23

ayovai koXXos. tovtol<; Kal to, linerKrjTTTOVTa avrfj vocrrjfiara diroKpovovTai, Kal tt)v Trpoayivo/ievrjv Biarr/povcrtv vyieiav. rotavra r)fuv 6 IBkottji; KareXnre (pripfiaica, Kal Toaavrrjv ej(pvTa Bvvafiiv, wv tcracri ttjv ireipav KaXms oi Xpmfievoi awe^S)?. 433- Kal oti fiev iroXXrjv avro<; 5 eiroieiTO tov fiepov? tovtov airovSrjv, eic tovtwv BrfXov VIII. 434. aKove Be ical rm fiaQtyrfi Ti<pr)o~iv iTnareWav Upoae'xe rfj dvayvmcrei, tt) irapaKXijo-ei, rrj BiBacrKaXla. Kal tov diro tovtov Kapirbv irpocrrWrjcrt, \e7ftw Touto yap Troicav, ical creavTov crcocrev<; ical Toiif dicovovTas crov. Kal 10 irdXw AoOXov Be Kvpiov ov Bel fid-^eadai, dXX' rjirtov elvai Trpbs iravTai, BiBaKTtKov, dve^lxaKov. Kal irpoimv Be <f>T)o~c 2u Be fieve ev 0I9 ep,a6e$, Kal eiricrTa>0r)<s, elBa? irapa, two? epaOes, Kal oti diro ftpecpow; to, lepd ypdfi/iaTa olBa<;, to, Bvvdfievd ere cro<picrai' Kal irdXiv Ilaa-a ypa<f>r) 15 6e6irvevaTO<i, (jyrfcri, Kal wcpeXi/ios irpb<; BtBacrKaXiav, 71-/30? eXeyxpv, irpbs eirav6p6<ocri,v, irpb<; iraiBeiav ttjv ev BiKaiocrvvr/, 'iva apTto? rj 6 tov Oeov dvOpcoTrot. 435. "Akovc Be Kal Tip TItco irepl tt)? tu>v eirtcrKO'ircov KaTacrTacrewi BiaXeyofievo? tL TrpocrTidrjcriv Aet yap, <pr)o~t,v, elvai tov eVt- 20 ctkoitov avTeyofxevov tov icaTa ttjv BiBay^v irtaTov Xoyov, 'iva BvvaTO<; rj Kal tou? dvTiXeyovTa<; eXeyyeiv. 436. IIw? ovv i'Skbtt/? ti? <ov, to? ovtoL (pact, Toil? avTiXeyovTat eXeyyew BvvrjcreTai Kal eTrio-TOfiL^etv ; ti? Be %/seia irpocr-

2 ttjv yivofievrjv z Tpos ttjv yeyevrjfievTjv y* || 3 iryeia** vulg || Kai too"avrrir] om xai yz vulg || 4 01 fcaXus xpw/ueiw o-vvexu! cfy*z || 6 eic tovtov cf || 8 om n\ vapaKk^aei. z |] 9 tov ax' aurouy || 13 eirurTcvffris vulg |] 15 o-o<f>i<rai] + cis aurrripiav yzvulg || 16 om (jyqai. fz || 17 wcuSevaiv vulg

3. 6 JSiiiTJjs] Chrys. ironically adopts the word applied to St Paul by his enemies.
VIII. St Paul's advice to Timothy and others on the subject of preaching.
8. irp6a-ex TXi &"· «rX.] 1 Tim. iv 13.
11, 5oOXoi<] 2 Tim. ii 24.

12. irpouiiv]'further on.' 13. aii Si ijAvc] 2 Tim. iii 14, 15 (irapa, tIvuv, and lepa (om. to), WH.). 15. iraaa ypa<jrij\ 2 Tim. iii 16, 17. 20. Set yip] Tit. i 7 --9. 24. Artoropiffeir] Cp. ImaTopLaai iv 4 (note).

124

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[IV. vm

eyew t»7 dvayvcoaei Kal rats ypa<f>ai<s, el ravrijv 8ei rrjv ISiwrelav dcrird^ecrOai ; o-Krjyfrc<; ravra Kal irpocpao-i?, teal pq6v/j,la<; Kal okvov irpoayrjfiara. 437. 'AWa to£? iepevai, <pr)o-i, ravra Biardrrerai. 438. Koi yap irepl 5 lepecov r)puv 6 \6yos vvv. on Be Kal Tot? dp^op,evoi<;, dicove ri rrdXtv erepot<; ev erepa eirurrokfj rrapaivel' 'O \6yo<; rov X-ptarov evoiKelrco ev ip.lv trkovcriwi ev rrdo-rj o~o<pla. Kal irdXiv 'O Xo'709 vfi&v irdvrore ev %dpiTt d\ari r/prvfievos, eihevai 7r<w? Set evl eKaara diroKpivecrOai. 10 Kal to, irp6<; diroXoyiav eYoi/ioy? elvai, airaatv e'iprjrai. ®e<r<ra\oviKevo-i 8e eirio-reWwv OlKo8op,elre, (prjcrtv, eh rov eva, KaQws Kal rroielre. 439. "Orav 8e rrepl lepecov 8ia\eyjjraf Ot «a.Xw9 irpoearwres rrpeo'^vrepoi Snrkfj? rtp.rj'i d^iovaOtoaav, p.aXiara 01 Koiriwvres ev \6ya> Kal 15 8i8ao~Ka\la. 440. Kal yap ovro<; 6 re\ed>raro<; rrji 818ao~Ka\La<; opo<;, orav Kal 81 u>v rrpdrrovai, Kal 8c wv \eyovac, roi><; p,adr)revofievov<; evdyoaac 777309 rov pcaKapcov (SLov, bv 0 X/3to-T0? 8cerd^aro. ov yap dpKel to rrocecv irpbs ro 8i8dtrKeiv 441. Kal ovk e/u.09 0 \o<yo?, aXk avrov 20 Tof) o~arfjpo<;. ,xO? yap dv, <pr)o~l, Troirfo-rj Kal 8i8diJ7), outo?

fieyas KK/qdrjO-erat. Et 8e ro rrocrjo-ac 8t8dj;ac r}v, rrepirrGts to Sevrepov eKeiro' Kal yap r)pKec elireiv, o? dv iroirjo-r), p,6vov. vvv 8e roj 8ceXelv d(i<])6repa 8ecKvvo~tv on rb fiev rwv epymv earl, rb 8e rov \6yov, Kal dWijKav 8ecrac

1 ff/cTj^etj--rpoipaaei j y' vulg || 6 irapaivei] + Xpyux c || 1 1 e/s rov eva yz vulg [| 14 na\i<!Ta\ + <j>iri<nii z || 15 reXeioraros mnu || 16 Tpoiros mnu \070s (cat opos s

3. dXXA tois UpeOffi] Basil raises the objection that St Paul's words as to the value of skill in teaching refer to bishops only (for iepeis= 'bishop' see on Upoxruv-q i 3). Chrys. replies, shewing from other passages of St Paul the importance of such skill for the inferior clergy (oi ipxi/ifvoi) as well.
6. 6 X670S] Col. iii 16 : cp. iv 4 (init.).

8. 6 X67. v/j.G>v~\ Col. iv 6. 10. irpbs airoK. er. chat] i Pet. iii 15. II. oIkoS.] i Thess. v 11. 13. o£ raXfis ktX.] i Tim. v 17. 19. Kal oix ifiis 0 X.] From a fragment of Euripides (Melanippe 488, Dindorf) kovk ("fibs 0 p-CSos, dXX' i/iijs /iijrpds wdpa : cp. adv. oppugn, vit. monast. I 51 A, m 79 B. 20. 6s yap Ar] Matt, v 19. 

IV. viii]

DE SACERDOTJO

125

eKarepa Trpot Trjv reXelav olicoSofirfv. 442. *H ovk aicoveis, ti <pr)<n, Tot? TrpecrftvTepoi<; 'JLcpeaicov to tov Xpi<rrov (TKevos to e/ckeicTov A16 ypr/yopeiTe, fivrjjiovevovTes, oti TpieTiav vvKTa Kal r/fiepav ovk eiravcrdp.r)v fxerd haicpixov vovOstwv eva eicaa-TOv vfiwv. ti? yap "xpe'ia t&v Saicpvwv, 5 r) T779 Bid tcov Xoy<ov vov6eo~ia<;, ovtcd tov fiLov avrw \a(iTrovTo<i tov airoo-ToXiKov ; IX. 443. 'AXXa 77730? fiev ttjv Tmv ivToXwv ipyao-iav BvvaiT av r/filv ovtos ttoXv o-v/mfSaXeadab [ikpos--ovBe yap iieel fiovov avrov to irdv KaropOovv (paiijv av--otov Be inrep BoyfiaToiv dycev KlvfJTai, Kal 10 "irdvTe? drrb twv avTwv fid-ycovTac ypa<pwv, irolav la^iiv 6 /3t,o<; evTavda eiriBelgai Bvvr)o~eTai; 444. Tt twv ttoXXwv ocpeXo<; iSpcoTcav, oTav fieTa tou? p,6,y6ov<; eiceLvovs dirb Trjs ·7roXXrj<; Tt? aTreipia? et? aXpeaiv eKirecrwv aTroo-^ia-dy tov awfiaTos Trjs eKKXt]cria<; ; oirep olBa 7ro\Xou? ·jraOovTas 15 iyd>. ttoiov avT<p KepSos Trjs tcapTepla? ; ovBev, Scnrep ovv ovBe vyiov<; 7rt'oTe<»?, Tt)<; 7ro\tT6(,a? Bie<p6apfj,evr)<;. 445. At(i Br) TavTa fiaXiaTa TravTcov efnreipov elvai Bel twv toiovtcov drywvav tov BiBdo~Keiv tow; aXXow; Xaj(6vTa. 446. Et yap Kal aijro? eaTrjKev iv dacpaXeia, firjBev vtro 20 twv dvTiXeyovTQJv /SXaTTTofievos, aXXd to twv dcpeXeo-Tepwv irXfj&os to TaTTOfievov vtt eKeivto, otuv IBrj tov fjyovfievov r)TT7]6evTa, Kal ovBev e'XpvTa irpo<; tov? dvTiXeyovTas elireiv, ov Trjv ao~6eveiav Trjv eKelvov Tr}<; r/TTr}<;, dXXd Trjv tov S6yfiaTO<{ aiTioovrai o~a6poTi)Ta' Kal Bed Trjv 25

1 jrpos] eis cfz || om Trjv y' vulg irpos tt\v aXXijXaic y*z || 5 om v/iuv f 1| 8 <rvnfia.\\e<r0ai y vulg || 9 ra iraxra y || 24 affBeveiav avrqv ckhivou yz

3. iriceOos t6 4k\.] Acts ix 15. id. 81& ypvy-] Acts xx 31. IX. The bishop must be able to uphold Christian doctrine against attacks: otherwise those who look to him for guidance, seeing their champion worsted, will begin to be assailed with religious difficulties. 7. d\\4 irpbs )iiv kt\.] The correct punctuation of this sentence is

due to Seltmann. Previous editors placed a colon after fiipos, a full stop after <t>ali\v &v, and began a fresh sentence with Hrav St.
8. outos] sc. 6 /3(oj. 11. dwd tGsv ai5. /*. yp.~\ 'use the same scriptures as weapons' 17. irdKirelas] Cp. 7ro\iTe(os iv 5 (note),

126

CHRYSOSTOMUS DE SACERDOTIO

[IV. ix

tov evo<; dtreiplav o iroXiif Xew? ei? ecryarov oXedpov Kara(peperai. kclv yap fir) irdvTi) yevmvrat rSv evavrieov, dXX' ofMOt, inrep wv dappelv el%ov, d/MpifidXXeiv dvayKd^ovrat' Kal ols fierd 7Tt'<7Te«a? Trpo<rr/ecrav dic\tvov<;, ovk en fiera 5 t^5 avrrj<; Svvavrai irpoffe^eiv aTeppoTr)TO<{, dXXa roaavrrj £aXr) Tats eiceLvwv elo~oiKi£erai tyv)(cu<s dnro tt)<s j^ttj?? tow SiSaaxaXov, co? Kal et? vavdyiov reXevrrjaat to ica/cov. 447. "Oo"o? 8e oXeOpo?, ical oaov crvvdyerai irvp ei? tt)v d&Xiav Ke<pa\r)v exelvov, ica0' eKaarov twv diroXXv/ievav 10 tovtoop, ovBev Ber/a-r/ trap ifiov fiaOetv, avrot 'diravra et'oa>? aKpij3w<i. 448. ToOto oiv dirovoLas, tovto xevoSo£ta?, to pur) 6eXr)aai TOtrouTOt? aVtoXet'a? airtov yeveaOai, p,r)8e ipavrw p,ei^ova irpofjevfjaai rc/Awpiav TJ79 vvv dtroKeip,evr)<; e'/cet; Kal Tt? av ravra (prj&eiev ; ovBels, irXrfv el 15 Tt? pArrjv pAfupeadat fiovXono, Kal iv rats aWoTptat? <f)tXoo-o<pelp avp.<popai<;.

14 fl-Xijx « firi Tit y vulg

3. 0a/>peii> etxov]' they might have felt confident. '
11. diropofas] Cp., for the genitive, d\X& p-aviai ra p-f/fiara ravra iv 1 (note).

13. TrpoS-evTjaai] Cp. /xdfava npo£ec« t6i> \ua6bv iii 1 1 (note).
15. (v rats aWorp. kt\.] Cp. adv. oppugn, vit. mona.it. II 70 A iir' aWorplow <pi\oaotpiiv kukois.

AoroS E'.

TaSe ivecmv iv tw e' X6ya>.

I.
II.
III. IV. V. VI.
VII.
VIII.

Oti 7toXA.oi! irdvou Kal oTrovSiJs at iv T<3 koiv<3 6/iiA«u Seovrai.
Oti tov eis tovto Traypevov Kal iyK<vp.tmv wrepopdiv XP*I> Kal &vi>a<r6ai At'yeiv.
Oti av /j.r) d/xipoTtpa ?X]j axprjo-roi eorai t<3 7r\j;#«. Ort fxakurra j8ao"/cavias toutov Set Kara<ppovtlv. 'On 6 Xdyous ei8<os TrXetovos SeiTai ottouSiJs »; 6 ap.a6ijs. Oti t^s aXdyou rd>v iroAAaii' ijnjcpov ovre iravrrj Kara-
<ppovtiv, ovrt irdvrr) <ppovri£ti.v Set. "Oti Trpos to t<2 6u» dpicrKOV p.6vov 8u tovs Aoyous
fivOfufctiv. "Oti 6 /at) Karaippovmv iwaiviav iroAAa. v-iroo-mjo-eTai Seti/a.

I. 449. "Oct?;? /x.ei/ ep,7reipt,a<; to) Zihao~Kak<p Set 77-/00? tov? V7rep ttj? a\t)6ela<i ay&vcK;, t/cac aj? r)(ilv diroBeSetKrai. "E^w Se ti Kal 7T/J0? tovto*? erepov fivpicov airiov KivBvvcov elireiv, p,aWov Se ovk ixelvo e'liroip. av atrtov eymye, aWa tou? ovk el86ra<; airm xprfo-ao-Oat, /ca\a>?- eVet to 76 5 irpay/ia avrb acorrjpia'i re xal ·jtoW&v yiverai irpo^evov

3 erepuv y || 5 Wfcl vulg

I. The preacher often feels that his congregation look upon the service as a theatrical performance, and upon him as an actor. He must

therefore take care not to be carried away byflattery,
6. irpbfyvov\ Cp. ir/jofepct iii 11 (note).

128

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[V. I

dya6&v, orav tov; BiaKovovp.evov<{ evpy arrovBaiovs re avSpas teal ayadovs. n ovv tovto ecmv ; 6 7ro\u? tt6vo<; 6 irepl ras oiaXi£ei$ ra<; KOivrj 7T/oo? tov Xabv yivofievas dvaXio-KOfievos. 450- Tlp&rov ftev yap to irXeov twv 5 dp%op,eva)v ovk £8eXov<riv e»? 7rpo? BiBao-KaXovs 8ia/cel(T0ai, Toil*; \iyovras, dXXa rrjv t&>v fiadrjT&v rdtjtv VTrepl3dvTe<; dvTiXafi/3dvovo-i tt]v t&v Oearwv ra>v ev tok e^ooOev icade%o/Aev<ov dySxri. Kal Kaddirep i/cel to irXrjOos fiepi^erat, Kal ol p,ev tovtw, ol Be eKelvw Trpoo-ve^ovaiv iavTovs' io ovtw Br) Kal ivravOa BiaipeOevTes, ol p,ev fierd tovtov, ol Be p,erd eiceivov ywovrai, Trpbs ydpiv Kal irpb<! dire^deiav aKovovTe<; ra>v Xeyofievwv. 45 *· Kctl ov tovto fiovov ecrrl to ^aXeirbv, dXXa Kal erepov ovBev eXaTTOv tovtov. t)v yap Tiva o-Vf/,/3r/ t&v XeyovTiov pipos ti tcov eTepois irovrj15 OevTwv evvcprjvai Tot? Xoyois avTov, nrXelova twv Ta XPV~ fiaTa KXeiTTovTCOv v<f>io~TaTai oveiBrj' ttoXXukis Be oiBe Xafiwv Trap' ovBevbs ovBev, dXX' vTroTTTevOelt /movov, to. t&v ea\a>KOTwv eiraOev. Kal ti Xe7<» twv eTepoi<; 7re·jrovrjpevcov ; avTov tok evpep,aai toZs eavTov o-vve^Sx;
20 xptfo-ao-dai ovk eve 452. Ov yap 7rpbs axpeXeiav, dXXd 7T/305 Tepyfriv aKoveiv el6io-6r)o-av ol iroXXol, Kaddirep TpaywBwv r\ Ki0apaBS)v Ka0fjp.evoi 8iKao~Tai. Kal r) tov Xoyov Bvvafii<;, rjv e%efidXop,ev vvv, ovtco? evTavda ylverai troOeivr), a>9 oiBe toI<; aocpio-Tals, orav irpb<; dXXrfXov; dywvl^eo'dai

3 7re/>i] xpos c || II Tpos XaPlv V rP°s airexSeiav vulg || 18 TrevovOe yz || irovridevrwv fz || 19 eupij/icuri y*z vulg || 20 ovk eveanv fz ovk e<rrtv c*

3. 5iaW|eis] i.e. 6/u\tas, ' sermons.'
6. rois W7.] i.e. irp&s tovs \tyovTas, the preposition being omitted as at iii 14 wrirep els ipx^tvit6v two. eUbva. rois ... rpdirovs (note).
7. tt)v twv 8earQv kt\. ] See Puech pp. 223 sqq. for a description of the behaviour of church-goers at Antioch. The office of the deacon

who had to keep order was no sinecure: 'il avait beau r^peter a voix haute l'invocation consacrte ' ' Pretons attention " (Trp6o-ffxu/j.v) : le tumulte, les distractions, ne prenaient jamais fin,' etc. For 0ea.Tuv cp. Thuc. iii 38 (of the Athenians) elw0are Bea/ral twv \tyywv ylyvevBcu.
23. yv i^ep. ra] See iv 6. NCk= 'just now. '

V. i]

DE SACERDOTIO

129

dvayicd^wvTai. 453. Tevvaias ovv Set icdvTavda i/ru^?, ical iroXii ttjv rjfieTepav virepfSaivovaij'i crfiiKpoTr/Ta, tva ttjp draKTOV ical dvwcpeXr) tov irXijOovi rjSovr/v KoXd^rj, ical 7rpos to w<f>eXifiwTepov fierdyetv Bvvrjrai ti)v atcpoacriv' &>? avTw tov Xabv etrecrOai ical eiiceiv, dXXd fir) avrbv Tat? 5 eiceivwv ayeaOcu eirtffvfiiats. 454- Tovtov Be ovSafiws eaTiv itriTv^elv, dXX' r) Sea tovtoiv toiv Svoiv, tj)? re twv eiraivwv inrepotylas, /cat tt;? iv tw Xiyeiv Svvdfiews. II. 455. K.av yap to erepov airy, rb Xeiirbfievov dyfit]<ttov yiverai rfj Sia^evtjei Oarepov. av re yap itraivwv 10 virepopwv fir) Trpoo-Kpepr) SiSacricaXiav tt)v iv ydpiTi teal aXari rjpTVfievrjv, evKaTa<f>p6vr)To<; virb twv tioXXwv ylveTai, ovSev dtro Trj<i /ieyaXoyjrv%ia<; icepSdvas iicelvriv av re tovto KaXws leaTopOwcras to fiepo<; tjj? dirb rciov /cpormv So£??? rjTTcov wv Tvxg, ei? ravrov TrdXiv irepdo-Tarai ra 15 Trj<; %r)p.la<; avTw re ical Tot? 7ro\\ot?, 77-po? %dpiv twv dicovovTwv fidXXov r) 77-/30? wcpeXuav Xiyeiv fieXerwvTi, Sid ttjv twv itraivwv iiriOv/xiav. 456. Kat icaOatrep o fir/Te trdcr^wv ti ·7rpo<; Ta? ev<fyrjfiia<;, firjre Xeyeiv et'So)?, ovre eiieei Tat? tov TrXrjOovs r)Sovai<;, ouVe w<peXeiv d^ioXoyov 20 Ttva axpeXeiav Svvarat, tw firjSev exeiv eiirelv ovtw ical 6 T(p iroOw twv iyicw/iiwv eXicofievos, e^atv dfielvov;
6 ovdev ovda/ius { || 11 irpo<pepr) cyz vulg || km aXari qpr.'] hie incipit cod d || 15 r]TTtt>neros yz vulg || 17 fieXeruvros c || 19 itaax(a> f II 10 euceiv vulg || 21 exw a<p' <av apeivovs epyaoaoBat dvvrjffeTai tovs ttoWovs yz vulg

8. rrjs iv t. X. Sw.J ' the force of eloquence,' implying florid rhetoric : cp. v 1 StdaaKoKlav tt\v iv x<^PlTl ktX.
II., III. He must at the same time cultivate his powers of speech to the utmost ; and observe the golden mean between love ofpraise and contempt for it.
11. iv x<£pm ictX.] Cp. Col.iv 6, quoted in iv 8 above.
14. Kpdrwv] For the practice of

applauding a favourite preacher cp. Euseb. H. E. vii 30 9, Greg. Naz. Or. xlii: Cognet p. 46. A Greek congregation still cries fi}TM on the not very frequent occasions when sermons are preached.
17. /ieXerfii'7'i] This goes with o6ti}. The intervening rots iroXXoij is disregarded.
18. p-ifre iriffx. ktX.] ' not affected by praise. '

N. C.

q

I30

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[V. II

epydaaadai tov? ttoWovs, dvrl tovtoov irapi'xei ra reptyau

Bwdpeva ftaWov, tovtoov tov<; ev tois KpoTois Oopvfiov?

wvovfievos. III. 457- ' A.fA<poTep<odev ovv lo"xypov elvai

tov apiGTOv apxovTa Bel, Xva firj OaTepa OaTepov dva-

5 TpeirrjTai. OTav yap avao~Ta<; ev tw fieaw Xeyrj to, tovs

pa&vficos f&Wa.? iTriaTvyfrai Bwd/xeva, elm TrpoairTairj Kal

BiatcoTTTriTai, Kal vtto ttj's evBeia<; epvdpidv dvayKa^tjTai,

SieppvT) to KepBot tcSz/ Xe%devT{ov ev&eoos. ol yap iiriTi-

firjOevTes, akyovvTes Tot? elprj/j,evot.<; Kal ovk ej(pvTe<i eTepcos

10 avTov dfivvaadai, tois Ti}<; d//,a0l,a$ avTov ftdWovai CKcofi-

fJLao~i, tovtoi? 010/u.evoi t« eavTwv avcKid^eiv ovelBrj.

458. Aio XPV> icadd-rrep Tcvd -qvioypv apio-Tov, eh dxpifieiav

TOVTOiv a/j,ej)OTepa)v eXifka/cevat, twv koXwv, "va dfKporepa

7T/30? to Beov avTm fieTa^ecpi^eLv il;f). Kal yap OTav avTos

15 aveirl\r)'trTO<} diraert yevr/rai, tots BvvqaeTai /J,e8' 00-7)$

ftovXeTai il;ovo~ia<; Kal KoXd^eiv Kal dvievai tow? inr avTW

TaTTOfi,evov<} airavTat' irpb Be tovtov ovk ev/iape<: TavTa

Troielv. 459- Tr/v Be fieyaXoyfrv^lav ov fieXP1 T^? T®v

eiraivoav virepo'^na<; eiriBeLKwadai p,6vov, dWd Kal 7re-

20 paiTepa irpodyeiv, 'iva p,r) iraXiv aVeXe? fi to KepBo<s.

IV. tivo<; ovv Bel Kai eTepov KaTa<f>povelv ; /3ao~Kavia<;

Kal <f>0ovov. 460. Ta? Be aKaipov; KaK7)yopia<; (/cat yap

avdyKT) tov irpoeo-T&Ta fiifiyfreu; {nrop.eveiv dXoyovs) ovre

dfj,eTpoi<; BeBoiKevai Kal Tpefieiv, ouVe a.7rX<»? irapopdv

25 koXov' dWd xpr) Kav ijrevBeh Tvy^dvao-tv ovaai, kcLv

3 taxvP0TP0V f II 6 eTiaTpeipai c || 12 Set y || 13 eXyXcucevai] tjksip [eiKeiv) Gcmnuy || 16 utt' avrov c || 17 ovk evfiapus tovto iroiei y 19 5eiKvvo-6ai XPV vu'g eriSeixp. XPV CYZ II 2° T" epyov by*z henr || 21 Setrat z vulg || 22 KaT-qyopias y vulg || 25 Set f

1 . Toiruiv\ genitive of price : ' at such a cost.''
III. 6. iirurTv^ai] ' to reprove ' : lit. 'to draw up,' 'contract ' (used of astringents).
12. eh aKplfl. kt\.] 'to have reached perfection in regard to both these virtues.' The charioteer has two horses, and knows how to

make them pull evenly. 14. xai yhp Srav ktX.] Cp. Greg.
Naz. deseipso et in episc. 775, where stress is laid, as here, on the personal character of the priest.
16. iviivai] ' to forgive, IV. He must not be perturbed at the thought of the envy and jealousy which others feel towards him.

V. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

131

irapd twv TvypvTtav r)plv iirdycovrat, ireipaaOai, o-ftevvvvai Ta^ew? avTas. 461. OvSev yap outgj? avgei (pTj/nrjv trovt}pdv re Kal dyadr/v, &>? to 7r\T)#o? to araicTov d^aa-aviarw<s yap Kal d/covetv Kal eKXaXelv ela>86<;, a7rXc3? to eireXdov airav <j>6iyyeTai, Trj? dXr)deLa<; ovSeva iroiovp-evov X6yov. 5 462. Ata TavTa ov Set twv iroXXdov KaTa<ppove2v, dXXd ap%op,iva<i evOecos irepiKorrTeiv Ta<; VTroyfriai Ta? Trovrjpds, irelOovTa toii? eyKaXovvTas, kclv dXoycoraTOL irdvTcov elev, Kal fir/Sev 0X0)? iXXenreiv twv Svva/j,eveov d(pavio-ai Sogav ovk ayadrjv, el Se, irdvTa ttoiovvtcov rjp,dov, /j,tj deXcocrtv oi 10 jx,ep.(pop,evoi treiQeaQai, to TrfviKaina KaTatppovelv to? idv <j>6do-rj Tt5 Taireivovo~6ai t<h? avpyirroip.ao'i, tovtok;, ov BvvtjaeTai iroTe yevvalov ti Kal Qavp.ao~Tov diroTeKelv. r) yap ddvfiia Kal al o-vve\el^ <f>povTi8e<; Seival KaTaftaXelv -tyv'xfi'; 8vva/j,iv Kal el<; dadeveiav Karayayelv ttjv eo-)(aTr)v. 15 463. Ovtcos ovv -%pr) tov iepea hiaKeladab 77730? tow dpyofievow;, SaTrep av el iraTr\p 717309 TralSas ayav vriirlowi StaKeotTo- Kal KaOdvep eKeivwv ovTe vftpi^ovTwv, ovTe ttXtjttovtcov, ovre oBvpofievwv iirio~Tpe(p6p,e6a, dXX' ovSe, rjviKa av yeXwai Kal Trpoo-^alpcoo-tv r/p-lv, fieya eTTi tovtw 20 <f>povovfj.ev iroTe, ovtco Kal tovtcov p.r]Te toZ<; itraivoif i^oyKovaOai, firjTe KaTanriiTTeiv rot? yjroyoi';, orav aKalpwi yivavTai Trap' avTWv. 464. XaXeirbv Se tovto, <h paKapie'

4 eyK(i\eiv byz henr || 7 apxofievov c II ckkotttuv c vulg kottclv y \\ vTrcpoipias b || 14 Swaivr' av KaTafiaXeiv (-fiaWetv) bfz || 15 ayayeiv cy apcryc^eu' z i| 16 Staxetrat fz || 20 eiri tovto y vulg || 21 ovtc-- ovre z || 22 ^07015] + Set z

4. to iire\86v\ ' the first thing that occurs': cp. contra eos qui subintr. habent virg. 240 B xaBairep ol iiediovres to tire\8bv awav ij>$cyybfievot.
8. Kav...etev] On the use of the optative (instead of the subjunctive) with k&v or iav in late Greek see Schmid Atticismus i 244, ii 59.
10. el--84\oifftv] For other instances of ei with the subj. in Chrys.

see Field Homm. in Epp. Paul, Index s.v.
n. to ttju/o] i.e. totc 5i), 'then and not till then.''
ib. dav <pdi.o"Q. /ctX.] 'if one is too quickly depressed by these mishaps.'
14. aBu/ila, <pp.~\ Cp. (ppovrLSas, &0v/i.las iv 6.
ii. Scival Karaf).] Cp. 6Wi)j> KaTOj3a\e(c hi 16 (note).
9--2

132

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[V. iv

rd%a Be, ailfiai, Kal dBvvarov. 4^5 · To yap firj yaipeiv eiraivovfievov, ovk olBa el tivi dv6payira>v irore Karmpdoorai' tov Be yaipovTa, etVos Kal eiri,6vp,elv diroXaveiv avTwv tov Be diroXaveiv iiriOvfiovvra, irdvrwi Kal ev rals tovtcov 5 a7TOTi/^tat9 dviaaOai ical dXveiv dvdyicr). 466. "Q,cnrep yap ol yavvfievoi tc3 trXovreiv, r/viKa av Karanreauxriv et? irevlav, a^dovrai, Kal ol rpvcfrav el(o66re<; ovk av dvda-)(pivTO tfjv evTe\w<; · ovtw Kal ol twv' eyKfo/iloov
epdovres, ov% orav ^reycovrai p,ovov eiKr), dXXa Kal orav 10 fir) eiraivdovTai o-we%&)<>, KaOairep \t/xo3 tivi Biacfidelpovrat
rt)v ifrv^ijv, Kal fiaXiara orav avTol<s evrpatpevTe<; Tvytocnv, fj Kal erepov<S eiraivovp-evov; aKOvcocri. 467. Tov Br) fierce. TavTrj? T^9 eiriOvfiLas ets- tov t??? BiBaaKaXias dywvairapeXdovra, iroo~a irpdyixara Kal 7roo"a? e%eiv oiei rd? 15 dXyrj&ovas ; ovre rrjv 6d\aTTav eo~Ti KV/iaTtov eKTOi elvai ·wore, ovre Trjv eKeivov i^v^r/v <ppovrlBa>v Kal \u7r179.
V. 468. Kal yap orav iroXXrjv ev T£> Xeyeiv 8vvap.iv eyr) (tovto Se ev 0X1704? evpoi Tt? av)' ovBe ovtco tov iroveladai BirjveK(!o<; aTrr/XXaKTai. eireiBr) yap ov <f>vo-ea)<? 20 dXXa p,a8rjaeeo<; to Xeyeiv, kclv ets aKpov avrov Tt? dcfuKr/Tat, Tore avTov d<j)lr]0'iv eprjfiov, av fir) avve%ei cnrovBr) Kal yv/ivaaia ravTrjv Oepa-rrevrj rr)v Bvvap.iv. 469. "Hare rots crocpojTipois fiaXXov, fj Tot? dfia6eo~Tepoi<;, fiei^eov o irovo<s. ovBe yap virep t&v avr&v r) tytftla dfieXovcri

1 oi/uu] + on yz vulg || 5 a\veiv~\ aXveii' ghwy vulg aXyweiK (v prius in rasura) berl \virei<rdcu koi eKKXiveiv /cat aviao~dai Kat aXvav (aX^cir) dehklstz vulg || 6 01 xat-P0VTes dfp

3. d7roX. airuv] sc. iiralvuv, to be supplied from tirawovnevov .
5. a\ietv~\ ' to be distraught.' Some MSS (see critical note) have \vTreicr6ai kcli iKKXivetv Kal aviSLadat Kal dXiifiK, where the first infin. is probably a gloss on the third, and the second on the fourth.
V. The gifted preacher ought not

to allow himself to grow careless in the preparation of his sermons. More is expected of him than of others: and his faults will accordingly be scrutinized with all the greater severity.
23. fia\\ov...nd£wv~\ Note the double comparative : cp. Blass Gr* N. T. 44 (5).

V. ]

 5000

133

 ,    ,      6 . 47°· *&5  '   ,        .)   ,   ·  ,
 ,      ,                ,       ,    ,      . 47 *· ®   ,     ,  -    .        ,       .   ,      ,    -,    '         15 ^   ,         . 472·  ?    ,    ,  ,  ,          ,   - 20      '   ,  ,       ,     '    ,      ,  ,  ,  ' '   - 25    . 473·                     , 

 ]   ||   * || 7    1§ || 13   || 14   $   || 8    1§ || 20  ' || 25   

 .  . . .  ]    .  6    , &        ().

1 1 . ] £11 ' <)5,' '':  ',' ^51^^, : 5«6 £;  1.  10.

134

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[V. V

to TV)(pv fi, kclv Bid ttoWoC avfJb^e^rjKO'i, Kal eiraicrOdveTat Ta^e&j?, Kal eirCKaiifidveTai irpo^eipw';, Kal fjLefivrjrai Bia7ravro<;. ical to fiiKpbv tovto Kal evTeXe? ttjv t&v ttoWiov Koi /j-eydXcov rfXaTTiocre Bo^av 7roWa«t?. VI. 474- ^pdf, 5 co yevvale, on fidXicrTa tcS Xiyeiv Bvvap,eva> 7r\etovo<; Bet rrj<; cnrovBr}<;' eirl Be rfj crrrovBfi Kal avel;iicaicia<; Toeraur^? ocr?;? ovBe airame'i, oaovs trpoTepov croi BtrjXffov, eBeovro. 475. IIoX.Xoi yap avTw crui/e^w? eiri^vovTai fiaTrjv kcu elicf), ical ovBev e%ovTe<; eyicaXelv ifK-qv oti to irapa iracnv 10 evBoKi/j,etv, drrej^dvovTaf Kal Bel yevvaiax; (pipeiv ttjv Triicpdv tovtcov ftacrKavLav. 476. To yap eirdparov tovto fjuao'i, oirep elicr) crvXkeyovcriv, ov crTeyovTe<; upvirTeiv, teal XoiBopovvTai, Kal KaTafiificpovTai, ical Bta0dX\ovcri \ddpa, ical irovr/pevovTat, <f>avepcb<;. "^v^V Be dp^a/jtevrj icad eKacr15 tov tovtcov dXyelv ical irapo^vveaOat ovk av (pOdcreie BiacpOapeiaa tj) Xvirrj. 477- Kal yap ov oV eavr&v avTov d/MiivovTai fiovov, d\\d ical hi eTepcov tovto iroieiv eirt^eipovai' ical TroWd/cii Ttvd t&v ovBev Bwapevrnv eiiretv eicXe^dfievoi, Tot? e-rraivois eiralpovcri, ical davfid^ov20 criv VTrep ttjv di;iav 01 fiev d.fiadca, ol Be ical d/xa0ia ical cp66va> tovto iroiovvTe1;, Iva tt)v Bo^av tovtov tcadeXcoaiv, ovft Iva Bei^cocri OavfiacrTov tov ovk ovTa toiovtov. 478. Ov Trpos tovtow; Be fiovov eKeiva toS yevvaia 6 dycov, dX\d ical 7T/J0? direipiav 6\ov Brjfiov iroWaKi?.

5 to) iwXiara Xe-yeu' f || 6 67ri] irpos vulg i| ttoXXijs Sural tijs amvSrjS xai ave^tKaKias Tocavrijs c |] 7 oirous] ovs fz || 9 om on to vulg rXqF tov irapa itaaw tvboKineiv cfyz || 13 \oi5opov<n fyz || ne/MfrovTai vulg || 15 (tax (pSaceic y* [] 20 01 fiev fiavia f 01 nev juacta flavor yz vulg

1. k8u> Sia ttoXXoC o-.] ' though it "were long since he did such a thing before.'
VI. Unfavourable criticism must be faced with equanimity.
8. ^ir(0i5oKToi] Cp. lm<t>iovTai i 4 (note).
9. oiUv txovm ktX.] 'though having no fault to find with him

except his universal popularity.'' IlX^y Sri simply = wK-qv : cp. Ar. Nub. 1429. With aircxOivoi'Tai supply avrf.
14. irovqpiiovTOx\ Cp. x/"?orei!etcu iii 15 (note).
15. ovk av <p8. S.,~]' had better die at once ': lit. ' could not be too quick in dying.'

V. VI]

DE SACERDOTIO

1 35

iireiBrj yap ovk eariv e£ i\Xoyip,wv dvBp&v o-vXXeyeardat tov<s (rvvep^ofievov; dtravTas, dXXd to trXeov rr)<; eV/eX?/cn'a? /Aepos e'£ IBiwtwv avvfjyOai crvpftaivei, roils Be Xonroiis Kal avToiis eKeivwv fiev elvai o-vveTwrepov;, twv Be Xoyow; Kplvai Bvvapevwv Xeitreadai ttoXXw irXeov r) oaov eKeivwv 5 01 Xonrol irdvre';, eva Be p.6Xi<; rj Beiirepov Ka0rjo~8ai rov Tavrr/v Ke/crrifievov rrjv dperrjv, dvdyKr), rov dpeivov elirovTa iXdrTovas direveyKaaffai /cporovs, eari Be ore fii)Be etraiveOevTa direXdelv. 479- Kal Set irpbs ravra<} yevvaiws Trapeo~KevdaQai Tas avwp.aXiav icai toZs fiev Bi 10 dfiaOlav ravTa ·Kaoypvcri avyyivwo-Ketv · Toii<> Be Bid
<pdovov tovto vTTOfj,evovTa<} Ba/cpiietv, a>? dOXlovs ovra<; Kal eXceivc^1;' p/qB' erepw Be tovtwv eXdrrw ttjv avrov vopl^eiv yeyevijadat Bvvap.iv. 480. OvBe yap, el £coypd<po<; wv dpio~To<;, Kal irdvrmv Kara rrjv Teyyr\v KpaTwv, rrjv 15 fierd 7roXXr)<; rfj<; aKpi&eia? dvayeypap.p.evr/v elieova virb twv Tr)s Te^vT/? direlpwv aKwmopevrp/ ewpa, eBei Karaireo'elv, Kal tj$ Kpucrei twv ovk elBoTwv cpavXr/v dyeiv rrjv ypa<pr}v wairep ovBe rrjv ovtw<; (pavXr/v, davpLao-Tr/v riva Kal eirepacrrov, diro rr)<: twv drkyyav eKirXrj%ew<i. 20 VII. 481. 'O yap apbcnos Br)p,iovpyb<; avrb<; earw Kal Kpirrji; twv avTov Teyyr/paTWv, Kal KaXd Kal <f>avXa Tavrr/ Tideadw Ta yivopeva, OTav 6 Texvvo~dp.evo<; avrd vovs

1 ovk elco-Tic y ovk eveo-riv z vulg || 6 /ttoXis] /iovov cf || 7 om -rqv aperrfv f || 9 etraveXBeiv y || 14 yiveo-0ai f [| 18 ayeiv] \eyeiv y* iryeio-0a< y' vulg || 21 co-rat itpiTTjs y

3. toiis Si Xoiiroi)s ktX.] There are three classes (according to Chrys.) in a congregation. The first is composed of trained critics {twv \6yovs Kpivcu Svvafiivojv): the second contains persons of cultivated taste (to these the words tous Xo«rous . . . o-vverurtpom refer): the third and largest class consists of the ISiwrat (referred to in oi XoittoI irivres below). 'EkcIvuv where it

first occurs (after avrois) means the third class : but later (after oaov) it means the second class.
6. tva Si p.. -fj 6V</r.] Cp. tvbs irov xal Sevripov iii 13 (note),
[8. <j>ai\t]v ayet.v'] Cp. dav/jiaarbv 770^ iv 7 (note).
VII. The best and safest rule for the preacher in composing his sermons is to aim at pleasing God.

136

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[V. VII

Tavra<; (pepy rd<; ifrrjcpow; · Trjv Be twv e^wOev Bo^av, Trjv ·weirXavr]p.kvr]v Kal dre)(vov, p,r)8e et'9 vovv f3aXeo-6a irore. 482. M.r) Toivvv p,r)Te 6 TJ)? BiBao-KaXia*; dvaBe^dp,evo<; tov dywva ral<; twv e^wdev evcpr)plats irpoo-e,)(eTw, /irjBe diro 5 tovtcov Trjv eavTov KarafSaXXeTw -^rvyrjv aU ipya^ofievof T0119 Xoyovi, ft>9 av dpecreie tu> 8ea> (ovtos yap avT&J icavwv kciI 0/309 eo-Tft) fiovos Tr}<; dp'iGTi]<; Brifuovpylas itceLvcov, p.r) Kporoi, fiTjSe evcfyr]/j,lai), el fiev eiraivoiTo Kal irapd twv dvOpwTvwv, fir) Bia/cpovetrda) ra iyKco/Mia' p.i] Trape^ovTiov 10 Be avrd twv dtcpoardov, firjBe ^r)TetTco, firjBe dXyeiT<o. 483. Ixavrj yap avrd) Trapap,vdi,a twv irovcov, teal irdvTwv p,ei^wv, OTav kavTtp avveiBevai BvvrjTai, 777309 dpeaxeiav tov deov crvvTtOels teal pvQp,Lt,wv Trjv BiBao-xaXiav. VIII. 484. Kal yap &v cpOdar) Trj twp dXoywv eiraivwv 15 eTriOvfiia. dXwvai, ouSev aureS twv ttoXXwv itovwv or/>e\o9, ovBe TJ79 iv Tft) Xeyecv Bwdfiews. Ta? yap dvorJTOVt tcSv ttoXXwv KaTayvdocreif fir] Bvvafievrj cpepeiv "^fvyrj eicXveTai Kal Trjv irepl to Xeyeiv piirTei rnrovBrjv. Bid tovto ypr) fidXuTTa vdvTtov ireiraiBevcrdai eiraivwv virepopdv ov yap 20 dpKel to Xeyeiv elBevai 777309 Trjv to-iiti}? tt?9 8wdfj.ew; (pvXaierjv, av fir) ko\ tovto irpoo-fj. 485. Et Be Tt9 aKpi/3dJ<i e^eTa^eiv e6e\oi Kal tov ev evBeia KaffearwTa Tavrrjs Tr/9 dpeTrji;, evprjaei Beofievov tov twv iiraivwv KaTaxppovelv ov-% fjTTOv r) tovtov. 486. Kal yap iroXXd dfiaprdveiv

6 tw 6eo)] + fiver(a z || 8 ewaivetrai vulg l| 10 twv aaovovTiav cfz || fxtj itfT. fiySe vulg || 1 1 ravruv] rraauv y* || 13 om tov cfyz || 14 om aXoyov c || 18 XPV iravTW fiaWov f

I . ru>v li-wdev] Cp. rods (l-wffev i 4 (note).
6. lis 4k ipiaeie] ' in the may in which he could test please ' : av goes with apio-eit, not with ws.
9. /iii diaxp."\ ' let him not reject.' II. TrdvTCop] sc. ttSvwv. With irao-Q>v (see critical note) supply Tapa/ivBtSn'. VIII. The effort to win the ap-

plause of ?nen leads to envy, haired, and uncharitableness, felt by the unsuccessful towards the successful preacher.
15. dXfixai] $6avw more usually takes the participle : but cp. Ar. Eq. 935 (pSalrjs Ht els iKKXtjaiav iXdeiv.
17. iKXverai] ' is enfeebled.' 22. riv iv ivS. kt\.\ i.e. the less eloquent preacher.

V. vin]

JDE SACERDOTIO

137

dvayKacrdrfcreTai, rrjs t&v iroXXwv 86%rj<} rjTTav yevopevo?' (itovwv yap e^tacodijvat T0t9 evBoKifiovcri Kara Trjv tov Xeyeiv dpejrjv, eiri^ovXeveiv re avroi<> nai 8ia<p6oveio~6ai, koX fie/u.(peo-dai fiarr/v, ical iroXKa rotavra dcryrifiovelv ov TrapaiTrjcreTai, dXXa irdvra ToXfirjaei, icav rrjv yjrvxfjv 5 diroXeaOai 8er), virep tov rr)v eicelvwv So^av els rrjv TJ79 t'Sta? evreXeias tcarayayetv TaireivoTTjTa. 487. TLpos Se rouTot? ical t5)v iSpmTwv airotrTijaerat t&v irepl to irovelv, vdpicr)<; cocnrep twos KaTacrKeSacrdelcnj'; ai/Tov TJ79 Vrl'X^?to yap iroXXa fxo^Qovvra iXdrrova tcapirovcrBai iyicd>fua 10 iicavov tcaraftaXeZv ical rpeyjrai 7rpo9 vttvov j3aQvv tov ov Svvdfievov iyKCOfutov /caracppoveiv iirel ical yecopyos, orav et9 XeTTToyea>v /cdfivrj ^mpiov ical ireTpas dvayicd^rjTai, yewpyeiv, Ta^ea>9 d<pio~Ta,Tai tov irovelv, rjv fir) ttoXXtjv irepl to irpayfia KeicTr)p.evo<; rj tt)v TrpoOvftiav, rj Xifiov 15 S4o<; e7TCKeifi,evov e^rj. 488. Et yap 01 fierd TroXXfjs t?)? ei-ovo-ias Svvd/ievoi Xeyeiv TOcravTr/s SeovTai 7^79 yv/ivacrlas 7rp6<s Trjv Trjt; KTijaeais <f>vXaicrjv, 6 firjSev oXcos crvvayayutv, dXX' iv toi<s dymcriv dvayica£6p,evo<; fieXeTav, irocrrjv tnro<TT7]creTai Trjv 8vcr%epeiav, iroo-ov dopvfiov, Troarjv rapa^rjv, 20 iva ttoXXw to3 fjMyQo) fiiicpov ti crvvayayetv Bvvrjdrj ; 489. *Av 8e Tf? ical twv p,eT avTov reTayfievcov, ical Trjv eXaTTto t/i^iv Xaj(pvT(0v, iv too fxepet, tovtco fiaXXov i/ceivov &ia<pavr}i>ai Bvvr)0fj, deias twos Set 'r'i'%j>9 ivTavOa, ScrTe

I rfrroiv yevofievoi] epwv z || 6 airoXeffai z vulg || 9 KaTaxefciffiys (sic) f || 7r«re<rou<7Tjs c || nj ^vxv] cyz vulg || 1 2 eirei Kai] + 0 z vulg || 13 \eirTaryeov ac franc Xeirroyaiov bflz XeTroyeiov d vulg |] 11 /ter' avrov y' vulg

2. arovSm kt\.] ' being unable to rival famous preachers.
3. Sia<t>9oveio-0ai\ Verbs compounded with Sid often signify
rivalry, and when this is the case they are chiefly used in the middle : cp. 5iaro£ei5e(r£!ai, 5iaKovTl£eo~6ai.
9. vdpKtjsl ' numbness.1 For the construction of KaracKed. with gen. (·rips yvxns) cp., at the end of this

chapter, irad&v rbv oxXok KaracxKe8df« t^s lavrov tyvxrts '· adv. oppugn. vit. monast. Ill 108 A, iroXkty t^s ^"X'?s Karaffneddo-ai vdpKijv.
11. Sttvov] i.e. lethargy. 13. \eTrr6yewv~\ Cp. \e-n-r6yca Kai avoKp-quva ii 4 (note). 24. diatpavijvai] ' to become famous.'

138



[V. 

  ,    .           /,,   /,   ,   ,  9   5 ' . 49°· /        ,     ·  

     ,   '   ,       ,  , ·

 \,      ,    .     :       ,       ,       . 49 "· V  ,  
15       ;     '    .»;,     ,        ; 492·       ,      ,  -
2  ,     ,    , ·     
  ,    ,     ; 493·  <         25 ,    '     ,    ,         

 ]   || 7   || 8   || 9   || 1 1    1§ || 19 \ 1§ || 11  ' ^ || 25     || 6 .      ! . 

. .] '   5$$   / (5 ' : . -
, (1 . 3·   . .] '  -
   , 

 .' 9· .']    . '
15· ] .   15 ().
.  §] 50. .

V. vni]

DE SACERDOTIO

139

o/AO(,t»5 tcu<; acrcof/.a.Toi'i ixeXerrjcrri Bia/ceicr&ai Svvdfie(7iv, at firjTe <f>06vqy, fitjre Sofi;? epmri, fiijTe erepto nvl toiovtw Onjp&vrac voa^fiari, 494- Et jikv oZv tr <ttiv dvOpwirasv toiovtos, to? SvvatrOai to BvcrOijpaTov tovto Kal dKarayd)victtov Kai avrjfiepov drjpiov, ttjv t&v ttoXXSiv So^av, Kara- 5 Trareiv, ical ras 7roWa? avTrj<; eKre/Mvetv Ke^aXdf, fidXXov Be fvr)8e <f>vvai ttjv dp-^r/v o~vy)(wpelv, Bw^aerat. evKoXa)<; Kal ra<; iroXXds Tavras diroKpovecrdai TrpocrffoXas, Kal evBieivov two? diroXavetv Xi/xevo<;' Tavrrjs Be ov/c dirrfXXay/ievof, iroXe/j.ov riva iroXveiBrj Kal Oopvftov cvve^fj Kal io d0vfxi,at; Kal twv Xoitt&v Tradebv rbv o%Xov KaraaKeBd^ei Trjs eavrov yjrvxfis. 495- Ti Bel Ta? Xonrd<; KaraXeyeiv BvffKoXia^ ; a? ovre eltrelv ovre fiadelv BwijcreTai Tt?, fifj 67rt rwv Trpayfidrajv yevo^evof avra>v.

6 eKTe/xeiv y vulg || 9 evStvov {-tu>ov) acdghlwyz evSiov ty' vulg |] 1 1 KaraaKfdaaei fmu oliv KaraaKevai;a dy franc vulg || 12 tt) ifrvxy bz henr

5. 0ij/>£oc] Cp. Plat. Rep. 588 c 6-rjpiov tolkIXov Kal iro\vKe<pa\ov.
6. ras ir. Ke<pa\ai\ like those of the Hydra killed by Heracles.
id. fiaXKov 84 ktX.] ' Or rather not to allow it to grow at all. '
9. efidteivov] Cp. Plat. Eegg. 919 A eiiiewty -yoX^ijc Trapcurx&v. Field in his note on Homm. in Matt. 540 E shews that from eiiia

three adjectival forms are found : viz. eddteu'ds, eflSios, and e&dXvbs. He rejects the forms eideivds and ftf&ijcAs.
n. KOTOffKcSdfei] Cp. on vdpKijs above.
13. p.ij 4irl Tutv irp. 7. ai5.] * if ke has not had actual experience of the life ' : for the use of irl cp. iwl tuv olaKwv iii 7 (note).

002 5"'·
 <> £  -' .
. "   #9       .
II. "     . III.      /  
 . IV. " 7?     6
,    . V.  709  &  )  '. VI.     ,,   ^ 
,  . VII. "    ,  « '   
   ,   . VIII. "     '    
  . IX.        ,
   ). .     . XI.  7 7     
,  .  . XII.        .
    ,  
.
XIII. "   )(     .
  .  ||    ||   /] !  1{*

VI. I]

DE SACERDOTIO '

141

I. 496. Kat ra fiev evTavda roiavTa, oldtrep ijicovaw ra Be e'«et 7rws olaopev, orav naG" eicaaTov ra>v triaTevdevTwp dvajKa^oofieffa ra<; evdvpa*} vire^eiv ; oi yap fie%pi<; ala^vVV> V Kv^a> oXKil Kal alcbvios e'/cSe^erat KoXacrif. 427. To yap, TVeLOeade Tot? r)yovpepoi<; vp&v Kal vireiKere, on avrol 5 aypviTvovcnv virep r&v yjrv%a>v bpwp, o>? Xoyov aTroSdxrovT6?, el Kal irpoTepov enrov, d\\' ovBe vvv o-uoTrrjo~o[iai. 6 yap {pofto? Tavrr)<; tt}<{ direi\r)<; irwe^ws Kararreiei pov Tr)v yjrvfflv. 498. Et yap tc5 povov eva <TKav8a\b£ovTl, Kal iXd^iarov, crvp.<pepei iva pv\o<s oviko'} KpepaaOfj els top 10 Tpa/yrfKov ai)T0v, Kal KaTairovTiadfi ew rr^v ddXaTTav, Kal 7ravTe? 01 rr)i> avpelBrjo-iv r&v dBe\<f)(ov TtnrTovres e*s avrbv dfiaprdvovo-i top Xptarov oi p,r) pbvov eva Kal Bvo Kal rpels, aXkd ttXtjOt) Toaavra dTroWvvres , tL Trore dpa irelo~ovTai, Kal iroiav Ba>o~ovo~i Slktjv ; 499- OvBe ydp 15 dtreipiav earlv alridaao-dai, o&Be et? ayvoiav Kara(f>vyetv, ovBe dvdyKrjv Trpo^aXeaBat Kal ft Lav aXka Odrrov dv Tt? Tbiv dp%op,eva>v, e'iye eprjp, iv Tat? oiKelais dpapriai,<i eXPy°~aT0 Ta^TV TV Karafyvyfi, rj iv rat? eripcop oi irpoeaTWTe?. 5°°- Tt hrfiroTe; on 6 ra^Sels Ta<s t&v dXktov 20 aypoias eiravopOovv, Kal top Bia/3o\iKov troXepbov trpop/r)vveip epypp.epop, ov BvprjaeTat 7rpo/3aXeo~6ai tt)v dypoiap, ovBe elireip, Ovk rjKovaa Tr)<; adXirtyyot;, ov irpor/Beiv rbv TTokepop. 5OI> 'EttI tovt<p ydp eKaOiaep, a>? 6 Tefe/a^A,

6 dtoaovres f om ws Xoyov airoSuxrovres y |] II KaTairovTurB-q] pupV z II 12 wavres oo-oi.. ..Tinrrovjiyz

1. The priest will be held accountable for the sins of his flock.
2. ^<ce<] in the next world. 3. 01) 7. M^XP" oiff.] sc. foraTcu : ' does not end with disgrace ' : cp. oiic tarri p-tyfi1- rotirov ii 1 (note). 5. ircWeo-$e~\ Hebr. xiii 17 : cp. iii 18 above subfin. 9. t$ ffjcaoS.] Matt, xviii 6. 11. TrdKres oi rty <r.] 1 Cor. viii 12.

17. icpo$a\ta6a.C\ 'to put forward as an excuse' : cp. ttjv Mpm> 7rpo/3aXX6/iievoi filav iv 2 (note).
lb. Barron av ris kt\.] When laymen sin, they may excuse their misconduct by alleging ignorance ; but the priest has no such excuse to offer, for rie is expressly charged with the duty of warning men against sin.
24. 'Iefe/c.] Ezek. iii 17.

142

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. I

tpr/aiv, "va Kal Tot? aXXois o-aXirl^r), Kal trpofiryvvr] ra fiiWovra Bvo-%epr}. Kal Bid tovto dirapaiTr)To<; r) Kokaai<;, kclv el? wv o diroXa>Xayi TVXV' &v J"-p T77? pofi<pala<i ip^Ofj,evrj<; fir) aaXTrlar) tw Xam (ir)8e o-rjfidvr) (cfyrjalv) 6 5 <TKOTro<s, Kal eXOovaa r) po/i<f>aia Xafiy tyv%rjv' avTr) ftev Bid tt)v dvo/iiav avTrjs eXr/cpdr), to Be aXfia avTr)<; i/c ^eipb<; tov (JKOirov eK^rjTrjo-a). II. 5°2- Havaai to'lvvv r)fid<i oadSiv et's outws ol^vktov BUr/v. 5°3- Ou yap iiirep o-rpaTrjjl,a<; ovBe f3ao-iXeia<: r)filv 6 X0709, dXX' inrep "repayfLaTO<; 10 dyyeXiKr)<; dpeTrjs Beofievov. 5°4- Kat yap t&v dnTiva>v avr&v KaOapwTepav tw lepel Tr)v yfrv^r/v elvai Bel, "va fir) 7TOT6 ainhv eprjfiov KaTaXifnrdvr/ to irvev/ia to ayiov, Xva BvvrjTai Xeyeiv Zw Be ovk eVt eyco, £77 Be iv ifiol X-piaTos. 505. Et yap ol ttjv eprjfiov olicovvTes ical 7r6Xem<; Kal 15 dyopd*} Kal t&v eiceWev dirrfK\ayp.evot 6opvf3(ov ical Bia·7ravTO<; Xifievmv Kal yaXrjvr)<; diroXavovTes ovk edeXovo-i dappelv Trj rij? BiaiTr)<; eKeivrjs dcrcpaXeia, dXXd fivpia? erepas irpoaTiQeaai <f>vXaKa<{, trdvToOev eavrow irepitppaTTOVTe<;, Kal fieTa, TroXXfji t^s dicpif3eia<; Kal Xeyeiv diravTa 20 Kal trpaTTeiv tnrov8d£ovTe<;, Xva fieTa irappr)o-ia^ Kal Ka6apoT7]TO<; eiXiKpivovs, ocrov «'? dvOpayireiav rjKe Bvvafiiv, ·npocrievai T<p 8eq> Svvtovrat' 77-00-97? oiei Belv tS> lepcofievcp
Kal Bvvdfieco*; Kal /3<.as, waTe Bvvr)6r)vai TravTos iijapTrdo~ai fioXvofiov rrjv 'j'vyrjv, Kal arrives to irvevfiaTiKov Trjprjaai 25 KaXXo<> ; 506. Kal yap ttoXXw /xetfovo? airm Bel KaOapo-

4 fiijSe Svo /irjdc rpeis fz || 7 {ryrrjaw f || 9 oi/Sc VTrep j3a<n\cias yz vulg || 12 tyKaTahiii.ira.VTi cfz || 16 Xijuepos cfz || effe\ouffi] avex0"TM z II r7 n^o icoi ftvpias y || 24 owr<)pr\aai cfyz

3. iav yip kt\.] Ezek. xxxiii 6. II., III. The priest must guard against sensual temptations with even greater vigilance than the monk. The dangerous allurements of the female sex may be fatal to his peace of mind. 8. crrpaT. oiSe |Sa<7i\.] Cp. iii 1

e( /icy yap a-Tparriytas i/fuv rj jSacriXefas atpeats irpofKeiro kt\. (note).
13. f<S Si] Gal. ii 20. 15. twv ticiidev]' arising thence': i.e. from the ttAAis and ayopi.. 11. &aov els ktX.] 'so far as the power of man permitted' : cp. t& ye els e/ii tjkov i 4 (note).

VI. ii]

DB SACERDOTIO

143

ttjtos, rj eiceLvow Kal q> fj.el£ovo<; Bet, ovto? irXetoaiv avdyicais iiceLvaiv viroKevrat, rat? Svvafievais avTov pvirovv, rjv firj ttj Btt)veKel vrf^et Kal rq> iroXXa TOv(p yj}7]adfievo? aftarov avral<; ipydcryTai rrjv ^fvy^v. S°7- Kal yap Trpoawircov ev/xopcftia, Kal KivTjfiaTav Btd6pvyjri<;, Kal 5 /SaStcreta? eiriTijBevcris, Kal (pwvrjs BiaKXacts, Kal 6<p6aXfjtcov viroypa<f>al, Kal trapeuav eiriTpi/M/iara, Kal 7rXey/idTcov cvvdea-LS, Kal rpi^&v fia<pal, Kal ifiarleov troXvTeXeia, Kal %pvcrio)v TroiKiXia, Kal Xldmv KaXXos, Kal fivpmv evohfjbia, Kal raXXa irdvTa, a to yvvatKeiov itriTrjSevet 10 yevos, l/cavd Oopv0f)o-at ^vj^v, rjv firj iroXXfj rfj t??s <Tw<ppoavvri<; avarTjpoTrjTt direo-Kk'rfKvla TV%r). 508. 'AX\<z to fiev virh tovtcov Tapdrrecrdai, Oavp-aarbv ovBev to Be Kal Bid tS)v tovtoc; ivavTtcov Bvvacrdat ftdXXetv top Bid/3oXov Kal KaTaTo^evetv Tas toov av6pd>ira>v yjrv^ds, tovto 15 eo~Ti to iroWrjs eK7rXr/£eco<; Kal airoptas jieoTov. III. "HS77 yap Ttves TavTa eie<pvy6vTe<s rd OijpaTpa, Tots ttoXv tovtcov a(peoT7)Koo-iv edXcoaav. Kal yap Kal r)/ieXr}fievi) 6'i/a?, Kal avjQiSyo-a KOfir), Kal pvirwaa aToXr}, Kal ayrjfia dveirL"rrXacnov, Kai r)do<i dirXovv, Kal prjfia d<peXe<;, Kal /3dBio-i<> 20 aveTriTrjBevTOs, Kal do-yr\p,dTicTTO<$ cpcovr/, Kal to irevia avtftv, Kal to KaTa<ppovelo-6ai, Kal to dirpocrTaTevTov, Kai, r) p,ov(joai<i, irpwTov p,ev els eXeov top opdtvTa, air

4 epyatiyrcu vulg || 7 exiTpi/t/iaro] eiriypa(j>ai y' vulg || 8 awffecreis yz vulg II 9 woMCiXia] evirpeireta cf i| 10 evwdtai y*

5. Kivrifi. Sidt).] ' voluptuous movements': fla8L<r. {kit^S. ' affected (mincing) gait': <puv. Stan, 'soft (voluptuous) tones ' (cp. 8ia.K\a<r8at) : 6<f>6. iir. (cp. Homm. in Matt. 354 c) ' outlining of the eyes' with stibium. wap. ivtrp. (Field Homm. in Matt. Index II s.v. Mrptfifw.)' painting of the cheeks': ir\ey/x.. <riv0.' plaiting of the hair.' With the general sense of the passage cp. Homm. in 1 Tim. 591 A sqq.: ad Theodorum lapsum

I 20 E. 12. diretrxX.] 'hardened.' Nopre-
sent ivoaKiXKu is found, but cp. <r/cA\w : see also Lightfoot Ign. II. i 510.
III. 17. ff^parpa] ' traps.' 19. aixf- f ·] ' unkempt hair. ' This and the accompanying characteristics are presumably to be found among the 'virgins' or 'widows.' ii. dveirlirX.] ' not painted over ' : hence 'simple,' 'unaffected.'

144

0$0505

[VI. 

  ?   / . \    < ,    ,   ,   ,      ,      5    . 5°9· '        ,        ,         ,      ,    )    ,       1   ,     ;   ,        ,      ,        415      ; 510· .   ,     . .            ,    ,          . 2 512.             ,    , )    ,     ,      ,          2 5 <,       . 5 1 3·          ,        ·  

7  ]   || 12  \>  |] <)    * || 20   1§ || 24  !    

9- &".] ' ' /   ] ' .'
4· ] ' $ ' :  ( )    <1   1> ! \>   /   ,,  

§   6§ &   }£3.1  :   '  '   » (> .
8. ]  \  : . . . 928, . . 632.

VI. Ill]

DE SACERDOTIO

145

Brf Tavra fiovov, aXXa Kal tovtodv troXXcp trXeiova Kal o-<paXepd>Tepa tois ev fikaco o~Tpe<j)Ofievoi<: o-VfiirvKTeiv dvdyicr] yevour av. SlA- 'O Be rrjv eprf/iov GTepycov irdvtcov fiev e^ei tt)v dreXeiav el Be Trore avrq> Kal Xoyicrfibs aT07ro? viroypdyjreie ri toiovtov, aA.\' dadevr}<; 77 (pavTaala, 5 Kal Ta^e'tu? crftecrOfjvai, Bvvafievr), 8t,a to firj Trpo<TKel<r@ai efjcoOev ttjv dtro t??? Oewpias vXtfv rfi <f>\oyl. 515. Kal 6 fiev fiovaj(p<i inrep eavrov fiovov BeBoticev el Be Kal erepcov (ppovTi^eiv dvayKaadeir), att' evaptdfirjTav Xiav. el Be Kal -ir\eloves elev, dXXd twv ev Tat? eKKXifo-iais eXdrTOVi 10 re elal, Kal ras virep eavr&v (ppovrlBas troXXS Kov<poripa<i irape^ovat tc5 TrpoaTaTT}, ov Bid rrjv 6\iyoT7)Ta fiovov, aXX oTi Kal iravres toov KoajiiKciov elaiv aTrtjXXayfievoi TrpayfiaTcov, Kal ovre iralBas, ovre yvvaiKa, ovre aXXo ri fiepifivdv ej(pv<ri toiovto. tovto Be avrovf Xiav re elvai 15 evireiOels tok rjyovfievoi<; Kal to koivtjv rr)v oiktjo'iv eyeiv eiroiTfaev, &>9 BvvacrOai avToov ra inaiafiara aKpiftoo? avvopdv re Kal eiravopOovv, oirep ov fitKpov 71730? dperfj^ iirtBoo-iv [eTrio-rao-la BiBao-KaXov Bir)veKrj<;]. IV. 516. Toov Be vtto Ta> lepel Terayfievcov to trXeov fliooTiKaK TreireBtfTai 20 (ppovnai, Kal tovto dpyorepov; irpb<; ttjv toov TrvevfiaTiKwv

2 ev ra /leva cfz toi ev fieau arpeipoiievw vulg || 3 n\v epij/uav cfyz vulg || 12 tw wpoeffTuiri bey* franc henr || 19 emraaiv y* || 8ida<rica\uv vulg

3. iravrcov -- drA.] 'immunity from all ' : ari\eia is, literally, ' exemption from public burdens.'
4. \oyi<r/i6s] See on \oy<.<rp.£iv above.
5. Stottos] ' vicious ' : cp. (tiBvfitai droTroi vi 12, and Field's Index II to Homm. in Matt. s.v.
6. Sid t6 j[»7j wp. kt\.] ' because the flame is not fedfrom without by actual sight. ' CXij is ' fuel ' : cp. vi 1 2 init. : tuv i><p6a\p.G>v r(ov t%u6cv oiiK ix0"TM" ^T<Xaj36r0ai -n)? toC irvpos SXr/s.
1 8. Btcp kt\.] ' and this [viz.

the constant supervision of a teacher] is of no small value for progress in virtue.' The words {irioraffla SiS. 5ir)veK7is are perhaps a gloss indieating the subject of the following chapter. If so, Sirep will simply refer to 5iiv<ur0a.i--avvopaii re Kal ivavopBovv.
IV. The character of the priest must be stainless : this we naturally expect from one who makes intercession to God on behalf of his fellowmen ; and who is, moreover, entrusted with the duly of celebrating the Holy Eucharist.

N. C.

TO

I46

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. IV

epyaaiav KaQicrrqcnv. oOev dvdyKt) toS 8i8a<Ttca\a> aveipeiv icaf? kica<rTT}v, a><? elirelv, r)p,epav, iva rrj yovv arvve^ela BvvqOfj KpaTrj0rji>ai irapd Tot? a/covovcri tt}<; BiBao-Kakia? 6 Xoyos. teal yap ttXovto<: virepoyKO*;, Kal 8wao~Teia<; 5 fieyeOos, ko\ paOvfiia dirb rpvQrjs irpoayivofievr), Kal iroXXd erepa 717509 tovtoi? avfnrviyei to KaraftaXXofieva airepfiara, iroXKaia<i Be 17 T(Sv aKavdwv irvKvoTr)<; ovBe p-e'Xfii tt)<? etrL<paveLa<; dtpLrjcri to cnreipofievov irecrelv' 77877 Be Kal dXiyfrecos vTrepfioXr), Kal irevia<; dvdyKt], Kal iirripeiai, 10 o-we^et?, Kal dXXa roiavra Tot? irporepois evavTia, dirdyei rfj<; irepl rd Qela airovBrj<}. twv Be dp,apTr\p.dTav ovBe t6 iroXXoaTov avTois p-epo<; Bvvarov yevecrOai KaTa<pave<;. 7T(U9 ydp, *"'' T0V(> irXeLovas ovBe 4k 7r/3o<r6i|reo)5 Xaacn ; 517- Kal ra [lev 7rpo? tov Xaov avTw ToaavTr/v e-^ev ttjv 15 dp/rjyaviav. el Be Tt? Ta irpb<; tov 6ebv i^erdaeiev, ovBev Sura evpr/aet. ravra, ovtco fiei£ovo<; Kal aKpifteo-repas eicelva Belrai T779 cnrovBr)<;. 5 1 8. Tbv yap virep 0X175 7roXea>5, Kal ti Xeym 7ro\6ft)S, ·n,da-q<; fiev ovv T779 olKovp.evrfi trpeo--
ISevovTa, Kal Beofievov rait dtrdvTtov dfiapTiaif TXea> 20 yeveo-Qai tov Bebv, ov t&v ^wvtcov fiovov dXXd Kal t&v
d-rreX66vT<ov, oirolov Tiva elvai XPV >' &Ym M1^ Y&P Kal rVv Tsl\.(oiiaeai<; Kal ttjv 'HXtov irappr)o~iav ovBe7rco 717309 ttjv

2 om ws ewrtiK rifiepav f || 3 om irapa c || 8 e/iireffeiv y || 16 om enciva c || 1 7 oXijs] + tijs y vulg

3. fcpar.] ' to be held fast.' 6. avfiirvlytt] Matt, xiii 22. 7. oiSi p-txpi t. ^tti#.] 'not even to the surface ' : the thorns catch the seed as it falls, and it never even reaches the ground : Matt, xiii 7. 10. tois TrpoT^pois] i.e. wealth and power. n. ovSk rd iroXX. --iitpos] ' not a fraction.' 12. avTots] This seems to mean the bishops, though Chrys. generally speaks of the bishop in the singular (e.g. t£ Upet at the beginning of this chapter). He is con-

trasting the relation of the bishops to their flocks with that of the superiors to their monks, who live under one roof with them.
13. &v tons irXelovas ktX.] 'since the majority of them they do not know even by sight.'
16. ravra] sc. ra irpbs rbv \abv. 20. twi> iire\$.] ' the dead.' For references in Chrysostom's writings to prayers for the dead, see Brightman Liturgies Eastern and Western vol. i Appendix C p. 474 : cp. also Bingham Origg. Eccles. Bk xv.

VI. iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

147

rocravTTjv iKertfpiav dpicelv ryyovfiai. ical yap Scrirep tov airavra icoafiov TreTncTTevfievo1!, kcu ai/TO? a>v airdvrtov Trarrjp, ovtch irpocreicri tg3 0ea>, Be6p,evo<; tow? airavraypv TroXifiov; o-ftecrdfjvai, Xv0r}vai ra<; Tapa^ds' elpr\vr)v, euenjpiav, irdvrtov t&v etcdcrTcp icaic&v eTracei/xevayv, ical iBlq ical 5 hrjp,oaia, Ta^etav alroiv diraXXayqv. Bel Be travrtov avrbv, inrep &v Belrat, toctovto Btacf>epeiv iv inraaiv, oaov rbv irpoecTTmra t&v irpoo-Tarevo/ievcov et'/cos. S1^ ' Orav Be ical to irvevfia to dyiov KaXrj, ical ttjv (ppticcoBecrTaT'rjv iiriTeXr} dvcriav, koX tov koivov ivdvTasv avvey&s icf>dirTr)- 10 Tat BecnroTov, ttov Tagofiev ai/Tov, etVe fioi ; Trocrrjv Be avrbv aTrairijcrofiev KadapoTrjTa ical irbo-qv evXdfteiav ; ivvorjcrov yap, oirolas t<z? Tavra Biatcovovfievas yelpa? elvat XPV> OTrolav ttjv yX&Trav ttjv eicelva irpo^eovcrav rd pijfiaTa, twos Be ov Kadapwrepav ical dyicoTepav ttjv 15 toctovto irvevfia vTToBegofievTjv "ijrvxtfv; 520. Tore /cat dyyeXoi Trapecn-qKacTi tg> lepel, ical ovpaviasv Bvvdfieeov dirav to fifjfia ical 6 irepl to Qvo~iao~TT)piov irXr/povTat T07ro?, eis Ti/Jirjv tov iceifievov. 521, Kat tovto iicavbv p,ev ical e'f avT&v ireiadrjvat t&v iiriTeXovfiivav Tore' iycb 20 Be ical twos rjKovaa Birjyovfiivov irore, on auTtS ti<;

3 aTravraxv yz II 5 om iravTuv cy || 18 ojrai' to ray/ia berl away ray/m /Soa y' vulg || 20 TUTT(V0r}vai c TUTTw8i)yai y* || rav Tt\ovp.evav z

I. Ucrriplav] 'supplication': cp. iKeTtiplav iii 4 (note).
3. rods curavraxov *"·] an allusion to the prayer for peace : Brightman op. cit. i p. 480 n. 25.
4. eierriptav] 'prosperity': lit. ' a good season ' (Itos) for the fruits of the earth.
9. tA TrveCfw. to 017.] Cp. iii 4, &rn)ice yap 6 Upeis kt\. (note).
id. tjjk QpiK. Ovalav] i.e. the Holy Eucharist : cp. iii 4 (notes). " Oh, what pure things, most pure,
must those things be That bring my God to me."
10. 4<j>aTTTirai] 'touches,' i.e. handles in the Sacrament.

17. dyyeXoi] Cp. Homm. in Act. Apost. 176 A : iv xv'" 4 Ovola, koX irdvra irpbtcetTai TjOrpeiriffp-iva (' prepared'). ...ir&peuriv 0776X01, apxdy7eXoi. See also Brightman op. cit. i p. 480 n. 29.
id. Svvd/icuv'] genitive with 7rXijpovrcu.
18. rb prj/m] ' the sanctuary, in which the altar was situated: see Brightman op. cit. i, Glossary of Technical Terms, s.w. 'Bema,' ' Sanctuary.'
ib. rb Bvaiaar^piov] ' the altar ' : Brightman I.e., s.v. dvo-iaoT-fipiov. Cp. also Hebr. xiii 10, and see Lightfoot Ign. II i 43.

IO-- 2

I48

. CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. vt

7r/3eo"(8uT7;?, 0avfiaaTo<; dvrjp teal aTroieaXvifrei<; bpav ela>~ 0o><i, eXeyev cn|re&>9 rj^ia>a6at TOiainrj^, ical icaTa tov icaipbv eiceivov d(pv(o ttXtjOos dyyeXcov IBeiv, a>? aura) Svvarbv r/v, &To\a<; ava/3ef3\r)fieva>v Xap.7rpa<;, ical to Ovaiaarfipiov 5 kvkXovvtwv, ical Kara) vevovToov, &>? av ei Tt? arparidtTaf Trap6vTo<; /3ao-t\e&>? ecm?KOTa<? 1801. ical eycoye iretOo/jLai. 522. Kai ere/so? Be tj? ep.ol BiijyrfaaTO, ov irap erepov /j,aOa>v, dXX avTos IBetv d^ia>0el<; ical aicovcrat, oti tow? p.eXXovTa<; evdevBe diralpeiv, av Tvywai t&v /j,vo-TT)picov 10 p.eTao"%6vTe<; iv icadapd avveiBijaei, oTav airoirveiv fieXXaxri, Bopv(j)opovvTe<i avroii'i, Bi iicetvo to Xr]<f>0ev, airayovo-iv evOevBe dyyeXoi. 523- 2u Be ovBeirco (pptTTeis, ets ovtcds lepav reXerrjv Toiavrqv elo-Juywv tyvxfjv, ical tov rd pvwapa ivBeBvfievov Ifidria et? to t&v iepeoov 15 ava<pepcov d%ia>p,a, ov ical tov Xoittov t&v Baurvfiovatv %opov e^waev 0 Xpio-TO<; ; 524- 3>wtos Blktjv ttjv oIkovfievrjv icaTavyd£ovTO$ Xa/MTreiv Bel tov lepecos ttjv yjrvxrjv f) Be r/fieTepa ToaovTov e%ei Trepiicei^evov ainfj o~k6to<; etc

tt)? Trovr/pas cvveiBTjo-eax:, eo? del KaTaBveadai ical p,7)8eiroT6 20 Bvvaadai, fieTa 7rapprjala<; ei? tov aiiTrjt; aTeviaai Beo"iroTJ)v.
525. Ot lepeis rfj<i yfjs elaiv ol a\e?" rrjv Be r)p,eTepav avoiav ical ttjv iv divao'iv direiplav tk av iveyicoi paBloo?, TrXrjv vp.5)v t&v Kad' virepfioXrjv r)p,a<; dyaTrdv eWiafievoav ; 526. Ov yap p,6vov icaOapbv ovtcds, a>? TrfXiicavTr)<; tj^ko25 fikvov Biaicovia^, dXXd ical Xiav avveTov ical iroXXwv

4 crroXiSas y' || 12 oi;7ru (ppiTrus vulg || 16 (puros yap biKipi z vulg [| 18 us e/c tijs irov. crweid. aei KaraSveaBai fz || II eurw a\es z vulg || 23 eiwdoruv yz | 24 ws TOLavTTjs y

5. /cdrai vevbvTuv] For the bowing of the head in the Eucharist see DCA 'Genuflexion.'
9. ivBivSc airaipeiv] ' to depart hence,' i.e. ' to die.'
14. ra pvir. (v. iyit.] i.e. who had not on a wedding garment : Matt. xxii 1 1.
16. x°P°v] Cp. <It6 x0pov /40"*-4

£l>vT<m> iii 15 (note), ib. 0wt6s &kt\v\ ' like a light ' :
see Matt, v 14. For Ukt\v cp. ii 3 &v re robs (rid-rjpov 8iK7jv kt\. (note).
19. us KaraStieaBcu] 'so that it hides itself : cp. quod regulares feminae etc. 258 C 01) KaraSiei, ovde e^Xet Siaff-njvai aoi rty yijv ;
21- Tijs yijs--oi a\cs] Matt, v 13.

VL iv]

DE SACERDOTIO

1 49

efiireipov elvai Bel' ical iravra p.ev elBevai rd fiiatTiicd twv iv fiefftp arpe(f>ofj,eva)v ov% t/ttov, iravrwv Be dirrjX\d%8ai fiaWov raJy rd oprj KaTeiXrjcpoTcov /xova^dSv. 527. 'JLireiBr) yap dvBpdtriv avrov 6fii\eli> dvaytci) ical yvvalica<; e%ovcri, ical TralBas rpe<f)ovcn, ical depd"irovra<; 5 KeKrrjfievoK, ical ttKovtov Trepif3e/3\ririevoi<; ·jroiXvv, KaX

SrjfMoaia irpaTTOvcri, ical iv Swaareiatf overt, ttoikiXov avrov elvai Bel. $2%. ttoikiXov Be \e<ya>, ov% vtrovXov pvBe icoXaica ical vTroicptrrjV, dXXd iroXXrjs fliv iXev6epia<; icai irapprjcria'i dvdp.eaTov, eihora Be ical crvy/earievai 10 %prjcr[p.a)<;, orav r) twv TrpayfiaTcov virodeait; tovto diraiTt), ical xprjardv elvai ofiov ical avcrrTjpov. $2g. Ov yap icrnv evl rpoTro) xprjcrOat, Toll dpyofievois diracriv, itreihrj pvqBe laTpwv iraicrlv evl vo/ia tok Kafivovcrt iracri irpocrcpepecrOai KaXbv, fir/Be tcvftepvrJTT} fxiav 6B6v elBevai tj)? 777309 tb 15 trvevp,aTa /wi/^17?. ical yap ical TavTijv Trjv vavv o-vve^elf trepiaTovyi^ovTai ^eifiwvef 01 Be ^eifiwve^ ovtoi ovk efjcodev TrpocrfidXXovcTi /jl6vov, dXXd ical evBodev TiKTovTai. ical 7roXX?}? %/oet'a ical crvyicaTaftdcreco*; ical dtcpi/3eia<;.

7 tt<hki\ov avrov kt\.] haec verba paullum mutata citat Suidas s.v. '\cjclvvtjs : cf. prolegomena || 9 ou5e viroKpiTijv f ovx VTroKpiryv vulg koi vfipL<rrt)v Suidas || 13 xPV°~aff^M cvz II :4 f"' po/io] tvi p.ovu f en pova Tpcnru y* ext ipap/iaKu Suidas || om ttclo-i vulg || 15 oSov levai Suidas

1. twv iv pJtTu <rrp.] Cp. vi 3, tois iv p.. arpvpopivMi, and vi 8 (init.).
3. tA opr[\ The mountains round Antioch were occupied by large numbers of monks : cp. adv. oppugn. vit. monast. I 55 A irpbs ttjx (prifiov /j.eTao-TTJvcu nal tu>v 6pwv ras xopwpas oUlfeiv, Stephens Life of Chrysostorn, pp. 59--68.
6. jrXoCroK ireptfi.] Cp. t£v Svvao-relav ircpif}c0\ritiivuv iii 9 (note).
7. Srip.. Tp.] 'taking part in public affairs ' : for ra Srip.. rpart6vtwv i 2 in a different sense see note ad loc.
ii. ttoikIXov] like St Paul (1 Cor. ix 12) : cp. ii 4 above (notes).

8. SirovXov] lit. ' with a hidden sore ' : used of that which has a fair exterior, but is inwardly corrupt : cp. Plat. Gorgias 480 B vrcovkav \f/vxfiv.
10. o-vynaTiivai] ' to condescend' : cp. o-vyKaraf3a<Tis (below) and crvyKarafsalveiv. Cp. Puech p. 31: Chrys. 'repete a chaque instant ce mot d'abaissement, mryicariMfcunt. C'est le mot qu'on peut lui appliquer a lui-meme. II imite autant qu'il est en lui la sublime condescendance qu'il fait admirer dans le texte sacre.'
1 4. larpuv irauxlv] Cp. larpdv iraiSas i 5 (note).
.·

IJO

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. V

530. iravTa Be ravra ra Bid<f>opa el? ep TeXos opa, tov Oeov rrjv Boijav, Tr)<; eicicXr)cri,a<; tt)v oiicoBofiijv.
V. S31, Meya? o r&v fwva^tbv dycov, ical 7roXi>? o fw%6o<;. dXX' et Ti? «a\co? Bioucovfievy lepwavvr] tov<? 5 iiceWev iSp&ras irapafjdXoi, toctovtov evpijcrei to Bod(f>opov, ocrov IBicotov ical l3acriXea)<; to fieaov. 532, 'E«et ^.£z> yap et /cat 7roXv? 0 ttopo?, aXXa koivov ttj<; 1|ruX^? Ka' T0^ (rcofiaro? to dyutvicrfia · //,aXXoi> Se to 7rXeoi> tj} tou o"oj-
yaaTO? KaTopdovTai /caracricevr). icav pvr) tovto lo-^vpbv y, 10 /ieVet /«j0' eavTtjV f/ irpoOv/Mia, ovk e^ovcra ets epyov
efjeX&elv · «at yap «ai vqcrTeia avvrovos, ical yapevvia, ical
dypvirvla, ical dXovcria, ical 6 troXv<; iBpa><;, ical to, Xoiira, ocra yrpos ttjv tov aw/xaTo? eirnrjBevovcn TaXanrwpiav, iravTa ot^eTai, tov KoXd^ecrdai /4eXXoz>TO? ovk 6W0? 15 laj(vpov. 533' 'EvTavfla Be icaOapa Ttj<s 'tyv'xfjs r) Texvrj' ical oiBev t?j? tov crwfiaTos eve£ia? TrpoaBeiTai, ware Beiljai tt)v avTTJs apeTTjv. t'l yap r/fuu fj tov o-wfiaTO? tV^v? crvjj,fidXXeTat 7rpo? to /xr/Te av0dBei<; elvai, [iiJTe opyiXovi, fiijre 7r/)07T6T6ts, aXXa VT)<f>aXiov$, ical crcocppovas, ical Kocrfjciovs, 20 ical TaXXa iravTa, Bi wv T)p.lv 6 [xaicdpios IlauXo? ttjv tov dptcTTOv iepeco<; dveTrXtfpcocrev elicova; 534- 'AW' ovk eVt T»j9 tov /j,ova£ovToii apeTrj<> e^oi Tis av tovto elirelv.

I trpos ev reXos yz || 9 KaropOovvTM y vulg || II rrjareiai ewrovoi kt\. in plurali fy*z || 12 idpusj aiSiipos cfy*z || 21 aceTuirwo-ec eucopa z

V. ^4 /a>g7 /art of the duties of the monk consists in the mortifying oftheflesh : the bishop has the harder task of developing the powers of the soul. For the early history of monasticism see the Lausiac History of Palladius edited by Dom C. Butler (1898, 1904).
5. iiceWev] i.e. arising from the &yi>v tCov p.ovax&v-
ib. rb Sii.^>opov...Tb /j.."] Cp. i) Sia(popi,...Tb lUaov ii 2 (note).
9. k&v] ' and if : not ' even if.' 10. /niva kt\.] 'keeps to itself,

being unable to manifest external activity ' (lit. ' to come forth into activity ').
11. vr/areta kt\.] Cp. ii 1 (notes), iii 12.
14. oin 6vtos lax- Chrysostom himself was forced to abandon the ascetic life, his health having given way under the strain.
15. KaBapi] 'pure': i.e. free from association with the body.
19. vi\<j>.\ 1 Tim. iii 2 sqq.: cp. iii 1 2 (init.).

VI. vi]

DE SACERDOTIO

IS I

VI. 'A\\a Ka0direp rot? p.ev davfiaTOTroiois opydvcov Bel TroWaiv, Kal rpo'x&v Kal a^oivLcov Kal pM%aip&v, 6 Be <pt\6cro(po<; airaaav ev rrj tyvxfj Keip.evr\v e%et ttjv re^yrjv, t&v eijtodev ovBev Be6p.evo<;' 535- ovtio Br] Kal ivravda 6 fiev /toi>a%09 Kai Tr)<> am/J,aTt,Krj<i einradeias trpoo-Beh-ai, Kal 5 TOirav 7rpo? ttjv Biaycoyrjv eiriTTjBeicov, Iva p.r)Te ayav dirtpKUTpivot rr\% tcov dvOpdrwiov a>aiv ofiiXias, Kal ttjv airo Trjs iprj/Mia<; eyacnv r)o~v)(iav, en Be Kal rr}<i dpl<rrr]<; p,r) d/wipaxrt /epacreeo? twv d>pa>v ovBev yap outco? dcpoprjTov tco KaraTpv)(ppMv(p vi\arveiai<i, to? r) t&v depcov dvwfiaXia. 10
tt)s Be tS>v Ifiaricov KaraaKevrj^ Kal StatT?;? eveKev, ocra irpdyp^ara eyeiv dvayKa^ovrai, travra avrovpyelv avrol (pCkoveiKovvres, ovBev Biofiai, Xeyeiv vvv. 53*5- 'O Be lepevt ovBevo? tovtcov et? ttjv avrov Ber/aerai %peiav, d\\' direpiepyo<; Kal Koivof ev atraaiv ecrri Tot? ovk eyovai, 15 f3\d/3r)v, ttjv eiricrT^firjv atraaav ev rot? rfj<; yjrvxijs Orjaavpols diroKeip,evt)v e%o>i'. 537- Et Se to fiiveiv e<f> eavr&v Kal Ta? t&v 7roW<wj> 0fiiXia<; eKTpetreo'Sat, 0avfj,d£oi ti<;,

13 ov Seop.evos vulg || 1 6 )3Xaj3?;i'] xP(lav jSXojSijs c || 17 e<j>' eavrov bfz e<p' eavru y vulg

VI. The monk depends for his spiritual advancement on many external circumstances {for instance the climate of his surroundings) of which the bishop is independent.
1. 0au/i.] 'jugglers.' 3. 0i\A<ro0os] Cp. (j>CKocro(j>lav i 1 (note). 5. TpoodeiTai] Contrast with this Chrysostom's earlier opinion adv. oppugn, vit. monast. Ill 100 A : (in the case of a monk) ivbs Set p.bvov, rpoSvpUas yewatas Kal dperijs' kBv toDto xpoirij, oiSev rb kw\vov vpbs t6 tAos tXSetv tt}s aperrjs. 6. rbiruv] The choice of a suitable place for a monastic settlement was a matter of importance, especially in Egypt, to which monks resorted in large numbers. 9. xpaaeus t. iipuv] ' climate ' :

cp. aiptav Kpavis iv 3 (note). Eusebius (H.E. ii 17, quoted by Leo) tells us that the monks chose a certain district in Egypt aa<pa\elas re eveKa Kal afpos eixpaalas.
12. airovpyeiv'] For descriptions of the daily life and occupations of the monk see /£«»/«. in Matt. $6i A, Homm. in 1 Tim. 629 A; Puech, p. 258.
15. inept, kt\.] 'lives artlessly, participating in all things which are innocuous, and he keeps all his knowledge stored up in the treasurehouse of his soul.' Kotvbs (' theilnehmend ') is practically synonymous with aireplepyos.
17. pAveiv i<j> i.] 'to remain apart': cp. i<p' eavroO pAvovra iii 14 (note).

1 52

050505

[VI, 

        ,           . 6        ,            5        ,        . VII. 53^· )         \  ' ,   '   ,       ·  <      
. '      ,       ,    ,   <     ,     1 5     ·    :
   . 539·  )    ,               . 54°· ^ <    , 20      , '     ,  . 541· ? , ,    -     ;       ; '     . 542· '      25   ;        

 - *   ||  ) * ||  ( * || 17 ] «  

3·    .] .    *  7 ().
VII.    / / /  »>  /      ' / .
8. ' .] .  12 ' !  ( /) -- .   4  6 ' \.
.  ' ] . '

   14 (). . .~\ ' ^^' : . 
   8. 13·  ] ..  <£ -
 : .  14 ...* (). 14. ] .   
(). 23· ° & .] .  »
 -     '   .
25.  *  .] .3

VI. vii]

DE SACERDOTIO

I S3

koivov, ovBe ei? (piXoveiKiav r]X0op,ev "rrdyrrore. el Be Kal tovto tfv crvp./3dv, ovSefiia outgk ecrn P-tJttjp acrropiyos Kal (iicroTeicvos, &>? tovtov, ov wBive ical ereice nal eflpeyfre, /j,7)8e/Mta<; dvayKa^ovcrr)<i Trpo<pdo-ea><;, firjBe (Bia^ofxevov tlvos, KaKit,eiv Kal BiafidXXeiv irapd nrdcriv. 543. 'Eirel 5 oti 76 el Tt? rr)v qp.erepav 777309 nKpifietav i&eXoi fiaaavl-
£eiv yfrv^riv, TroXXa avriji evp^crei to cradpd, ovBe af'ro? diyvoels, 6 ^dXicrra iravrav r/pMi rot? eyKap,ioi<; eiralpeiv irapd irdcnv ela>6(o<{. 544- Kot oti ye ov p.erpid^a>v ravra Xeym vvv, avap,vrjcrov cravTov, ocra/cts enrov 77730? ere, Xoyov 10 toiovtov yevop,evov 77"o\Aa/«? r)p,lv oti, ei rt? aipecnv puoi irpovrtdei,, ttov p,dXXov {3ovXoip,r]v evBoKi/Aeiv, iv ttj rfj<i eicic\T)o~ia<; nrpoerTaeria, rj Kara tov twv p,ovaywv fBLov, fivpiai*} dv yjr^<poi<i to "irpoTepov eBe%dp.r)v eycoye. ov yap BteXnrov 7TOT6 panapL^wv 777)0? ere tovs eicelv7)5 t?}? Bia- 15 KovLas Trpoo-Trjvai Bvvr)6evTa<; KaXws. oti Be, oirep epMicdptX,ov, ovk dv e<pvyov i/cavws ej(wv p,eTeX6elv, ouSei? dvTepel. 545- 'A\\a tL irdda> ; ovBev ovtws d^prjcrTov ei? e/ocA/rycria? irpocTTaaiav, <b? avTt) 17 dpyia Kal r\ dp,eXeTi)erLa, fjv erepoi p,ev dcrKrjcnv Tiva eivai vofii^ovtriv, eya> Be avTtjv d>enrepel 20 irapaireTaap,a ttj? ot/cet'a? e^co <j>avXoTr)To<i, ra irXeiova t£v e\aTTcop,aT<ov twv ip-avrov TavT-p crvyKaXvTTTtov Kal ovk euiv (palveadai. 54^- 'O yap ivedicr0el<; ToaavTr)<; aTToXaveuv dirpaypoervvr)^ Kal iv ycrv^la Bidyeiv ttoXXt), Kav p.eydXr)s fi (pvaews, vtto t?7? avaerKr)<TLa<; 8opv/3eiTai 25 Kal TapaTTeTai, Kal t»j? oiKetas Bvvdp,ea><; irepiKOTTTei p.epo<;

3 e^eBpeipe yz || 8 a7»o«s] apvqai) y* || 18 ovdev] + yap z vulg 20 a<TKTi<riP Tiva] + 0avp.a<rTriv befyz franc henr oliv vulg || -23 e$ur$eis yz

seems to imply that Chrys. at this time was not living with his mother : see on irpJs p.e i 3.
1. oiSe els </>i\ov. kt\.] ' nor have we ever quarrelled* (which might have led Anthusa to betray her son's faults).
7. <ra0p&\ ' weak ' : not ' cor-

rupt.' 9. /lerpicifwj'] Cp. ixerpii^ovra
ii 5 (note). Here it = elpavevifuvos, ' through false modesty .'
17. inavCis lxav Mf.] ' if I had been able to administer it well. '
18. t( rdffu ;] Cf.KalH ira0a ; ii 6 (note).

154

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. vn

ov /Aiicpdp to dyv/ivacTTOv. orav Be ofiov Kai fipaBelas rj Biavoias, /cal twv toiovtwv dywvwv aireipos, tovto Btj to qfierepov, tS>v Xidlvwv ovBev Biolaei ravrrjv Be%dp,evo<; t^v

oiKovopiav. 547- Ata tovto twv ef iieelvtjs ep^op.ivwv 5 t»7? 7ra\at,aTpa<; et? tov<; dywva<; tovtovs oXiyoi BiaxpaL-
vovTar ol Be irXeiov? eXey%ovTai, Kai KaTcnriTTTovo-i, Kai irpdyfiaTa viropevovaiv dtjBrj Kai ^dXetrd, Kai ovBev aireucos. OTav yap pr/ trepl t&ji> avTwv oi re aywve<! wo~i Kai to yvfivdaia, twv dyvp.vdcTwv 6 dywvi^ofievos ovBtv io Bt,evrjvo,)(e. 54^- Ao^5 fidXiaTa Bel KaTa<f>povelv tov el? tovto ipyopevov to o-rdBiov, 6pyfj<; dvwTepov elvai, aweo~eo)<; efiifKew TroWfj<;. tovtcov Be tw tov fiovrfpr) orepyovTi fiiov ovBepia yvp,vacrt,a<; viroOeo-i,? irpoKevrai. ovBe yap roil? Trapof;vvovTa<; eyei voXXovt, iva p.eXeTiyo'r) KoXd^eiv 15 tov Ovpov tt)v Bvvap.iv ovTe tou? &av/j,d£ovTa<;, Kai KpoTovvTa<;, Xva TratBevOi) tov<; irapd twv ttoXXwv Btatrrvetv eiraivovs' tt)? t« iv Tat? eKK\rjo-[ai? diraiTovp,evr)S avvecrew?, ov iroXv? avTOK X0709. OTav ovv eXOwaw et? Toii<i dywvas, wv p,r) pep,eXeTi]Kaai ttjv irelpav, dwopovvTat, 20 iXiyytwaiv, el<s dprj^aviav eKTritTTovai, Kai 7T/oo? toj fj,rjBev i-iriBovvai Trpbs dpeTtjv, Kai direp ey(ovre<i rjX0ov iroXXol iroXXaKi<; dirwXeo-av. VIII. 549- BA2. Ti ovv; Toiif iv fiecrw o-Tpe<pop.evov;, Kai irpaypdrmv <t>povTL%ovTa<; /3to>-

2 toiovtw \oyav km ayuvuv yz vulg || 3 ran \iB<av y* || 12 cinrXcuv z vulg |j toutu 5e yz vulg || 13 ouSeytuas y || 15 0au,uaf.] yuaKapifoxTas vulg || 16 SiaTrTvew] + uSe vulg || 18 0 X070S z vulg || 20 «s a/irixavias cfivtrrovixiv y ]| 21 us aperriv f [| 23 ev toj fieau vulg

2. tovto St) kt\.] as is the case with me, --he will be no better than
(as dumb as) a marble statue' : cp. ingenium statua taciturnius Hor. Ep. ii 2. 83.
1 1 . o-TdSiov] Cp. aTaiiov ii 6 (note).
12. Tbv noviifrq--filov] 'the monastic life. '
15. rod 6v/j.o0] Chrys. is probably thinking of his own case : cp.

iii 13, 14: vi 12. 20. ZX177.] Cp. CKiyytwrras iii 13
(note). 21. aircp. ?x- vX] 'what they
brought with them ' : i.e. their original stock of virtue.
VIII. The temptations of the world and the flesh speedily find out the weak points in the character of the monk who becomes a bishop.

VI. ]

 5000

155

, ,     ,    ,   ,  $   , ; 55°· , ,   .   '    ,    · '      5
        ,       ,       - ,    ,     . 55*·       -  ,      ,       ,           ,   . 552·      ,               . 553·      ,     ,    "        ,           ,   9 ,  2 ,  ,  ,  6   ,        1 554·    ,       .      , ,  ·    2  ,   ,  -

3 ]  - * || 4  /3  || 6 ] +   1§; || 8 /  || 19     || 22  £

5· '  ! .]  &(.-   5-- 5   ( 1)6    ).
12.   ] . .
  . 62      $   , \!      1>5  ,

&5 . 1 6.  .] ' & /
  (/).' 19-  \]' / 1/ .'1
%>5 = ()<:1·§, (2),
   15 £8    .   . .   ;.

156

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. vni

vecrOai Tre<f>VKe, Kal row e%ovTa<; avra rrXeiova dfiapTaveiv /3ta£eTat. 555- Kal yap ell epara B6^r]<; eiralpei tov fir) irpoak")(pvTa, Kal ei? aXa^oveiav Kal el<; ^prjfidrcov eiriOvfiiav viroavpet, Be Kal ell rpv<prjv Kal et? avecriv Kal 5 paOvfilav, Kal Kara fuxpov els rd irepairepo) tovtcdv etc tovtcov TiKTO/j,eva KaKOi, 55^- IloXXa yap icrriv ev to /xecra) to. Bvvdfieva yjrvxfy aKpifieoav ixXvaai, Kal rbv eV evOeias BiaKo\frai Bpofiov. 557- Kal irp&TOv d-rrdvrav ai 7T/30? rd? yuvaiKas ofiiXiat. oi/Be yap ea-ri rbv irpoearSiTa, io Kal iravrbs tov ttoi/mvlov KtfBofievov, tov fiev t&v dvBpSsv eirufiekeiaOai uepovs, to Be twv yvvaiKav irapopdv, o fj,d\io~Ta Beirai irpovoias TrXeiovos, Bid to vpbi rd<; dfiapTias evoXiadov aXXa Bet Kal t»)? tovtoiv vyoeias, el Kal fir} eK TrXeiovos, dXX, ovv e'£ tarj<; (f>povTi^eiv t?)? fioipas, 15 tov Xa%6vTa Trjv ewio-Koirrfv BtoiKeiv. Kal yap eTncrKOTrelo~0ai avTas, rjviKa av Kafivcoai, Kal irapaKaXelv, rjviKa av irevOao-c, Kal eVnrXrjTTew padvp.ovo-ai<;, Kal ftorjdelv Karairovovfievaiq dvdyKrj. 55&- Tovtcov Be yivofLevcov, iroXXat av evpoi ra? irapeicrBvo-ei<; 6 Trovr)po<;, el fir/ rjKpiftafievr] 20 rt? eavrov Tei%io-eie (pvXaKrj. Kal yap o<f>OaX/j,o<; /BdXXei Kal Oopvfiel y]rv%r)v, ov% 0 tt)? aKoXdarov fiovov, aXXa Kai 6 TJj? o-<o<ppovo<>, Kal KoXaKeiai fiaXdo-o-ovat, Kal Tifial KaTaBovXovvTar Kal dydirr) %eovo~a, tovto Br) to irdvTCov aiTiov twv dyaOtbv, fivpltav atTiov yeyove KaK&v Tot? ovk 25 bp65i<; xpr)<rap,evoi<i aiiTy. 559- "HBrj Be Kal <ppovTiBe<; o-vvey[ei<; -ijfiftXvvav to rrj<: Biavola<; 6%v, Kal fioXvf3Bov

5 tovtoiv (coi eK tovtoiv vulg II 7 tov £7i-' evOeias] tov ttjs eiriffvfuas G tov ctri Seov vulg || 12 fieifrovos f || Tpos afiapnav yz || 17 e7ri(3or)9«i> yz || 25 <ppovTi6es Kat (rwexets vulg

7. tok ^tt' eiOelas kt\.] ' to check their onward course ' : cp. ^f ci$(las i s (note).
12. to irpbs ras d^. ei>.] ' its tendency towards sin?
14. Ik v\eiovos.../iotpas~\ Cp. iii 7, where the same phrase is found.

15. rbv \axbvTa tt/v iir.] Cp. iii 1 5 (note on a! toiWt?s irpd&voi ttjs Ti/iijs).
id. tTriffKOTcioBai] ' to visit' : but at iii 18 'to be visited.'
19. TrapeiaS.] 'secret means of entry.'

VI. vni]

DE SACERDOTIO

157

ffapvTepov to ttttjvov dtzeipyaoavTO' ical 6vfi6<; Be irpoaireaobv icairvov Bikijv to evBov Karetryev diravTa. IX. 560. Tt av Tt? eliroi Tas iic tt)<; \vtti)<; fiXdfias, to? v/3pei<;, Tas iirrjpelas, t«? /i/xi|rei?, t<z? irapd tcov fiei£6va>v, Ta<; irapd tcov eXaTTOvcov, rd<; irapd tcov 5 o'vi/ctwi', ra? irapd twv dtrvveriov ; $6l. Tovto yap Br] fidXio-ra to yevo<; tt)<; 6pdrj<i direo-Tepij/Mevov KpLaemf, fiefi^fnfioipov Te io~Ti /cat ovk av evKoXtc; airoXoyiai dvda^oiVTo iroTe. 562. Tov Be irpoearcoTa tcaXaJs ovBe tovtcov Bel icaracppovelv, aXXd 777309 diravTa1; irepl wv av 10 eyKaXdScri BiaXvecrdai, p,eTa iroWi]<; 777? eirieiicelas ical irpaoTTjTot;, avyyivcoo-icovTa p,dXXov avTol<i Tr)<; dXoyov fie/j.yjrea><;, rj dyavaicTovvTa ical opyi^ofievov. 5^3- ^t yap 6 /ia/cdptos HavXo<; /at) KXoirr)<; virovotav Xdftr] irapd Tot? fiadrjTals eBeicre, ical Bid tovto irpocreXa^e ical eTepovs et? 15 T^l/ twv yprj/juaTcov Biaicoviav,"\va fit'} Tt? rj/iia? fi(op,rjariTai, cjyrfcriv, iv tj) dBpoTrjTt TavTrj Ty BiaKovov/j.evr) vcf> r)p.SiV iroo<i i)iia<; ov irdvTa Bel iroielv, &cne to? irovrjpd^ dvaipelv VTTO^ia<i, icav yjrevBels, Kav dXoyitTTOi rvyyavaaiv ovcrai, icav crcpoBpa t??? rjp,eTepa<; direywcn, 86^9 ; 564. OvBevos 20 yap dfiapT'Tj/jLaTO's toctovtov ly/tet? dcpeaTrjicafiev, oaov icXoirfj<; 0 TlavXos' aXX oyaa>; ical toctovtov dcpecrT7]icto<{ Trjf irovrjpa<; TavTTjt irpa^eca, ovBe ovtcos 7]fieXr)o~e 7T?<? twi/ iroXXwv virovoia<!, KaiToi Xiav ovo~r)<} dXoyov ical fiavicoBovi. fiavLa yap rjv, tolovtov inroirTevcraL Tt irepl tt}? fiaicapla<} 25 ical 0avfiao-Tr}<; 4iceivi]<s -v/tv^t)?' aXX' o/m»? ovBev tjttov ical

1 km 0vixos 8e] + Kat vulg II 3 \eyoi vulg || tos Xoixas j8Xaj9as vulg || 7 7«'o$ tot opStji aireffTepTifievav vulg || 16 iva jui) fyz || 20 axex<"""« f II 24 yuavtas cfz || 26 (ce^oXijs by*z henr vulg

IX. Public opinion, even if erroneous,must nevertheless be considered. The bishop must be above suspicion.
8. /j.c iiipifi. ] 'fond of cavilling ' : cp. iii 16.
11. SiaXieaBai] ' to come to terms' 12. rijs dXAyou ix.] genitive of

cause after avyyiviliaKovra. 14. icXcnrijj] In spite of all
Chrysostom's care he was himself accused of misappropriation of Church funds at the Synod of the Oak (403).
16. fro jui) rts] » Cor. viii 20.

158

CHR YSOS TOMUS

[VI. IX

ravTr)<; rrj<; inroifrtas, tt)*? ovrax; dXoyov Kai fjv ovBel? av fit) ·jrapairaiwv vircoTrrevo-e, iroppcoOev dvaipel rds atrlas. Kai ov Bueinvae Tqv twv iroXX&v avoiav, ovBe elire' Tivi yap av enreXOoi irore Toiavra trepi qficov vtrovoelv, koX diro 5 rwv <T7)p.eLa>v, teal diro 1-779 eVtet/ee/a? t??? iv tS /St'ft), iravreov 17/4119 Kai TifMovrwv Kai Oavfia^ovrav ; dWd irdv rovvavt'lov Kai trpoeiBe Kai TrpoaeB6K7)o~e Tavrrjv tt)v irovrjpdv virovoiav, icai nrpoppt^ov avrrjv aveairaae, fidXXov Be ovBe <pvvat Trjv apxyv d<pfJKe. Bia tl; Ti.povoovp.ev yap, (prjci, 10 Ka\a oil fiovov ivtowiov K.vpiov, dXXa, Kai evmiriov dv0pd>ircov. 5^5- Toaavrp Bel, p,dXXov Be kai irXeiovt Keypf}o~0ai cnrovBfj, wcrre firj fiovov alpofiivas Karaairav Kai KwXveiv Ta? <prjfAa<! ra<; ovk dya6a<;, dXXa Kai 7r6ppa>9ev, odev av yevoivTO, irpoopav, Kai ra<; Trpo(pao~ei<; ilj wv riKTOvrat 15 irpoavaipeiv, fir/ irepifieveiv aura? o-vcTfjvai Kai iv Tots t&v iroXXwv BiaOpvXrjOfjvat, o~Tojiao~i. TiyviKavra yap ovre eviropov avra<; dcf>avi.o-ai Xoiirbv, dXXa xai Xiav 8uo-%epe?, Taya Be Kai dBvvarov' oine aty/juov, tg> fierd ttjv t&v 7roXXc!)v ftXafiriv tovto yLvecrdai. 566. 'A\Xa yap fie%pi 20 two? ov o-Tijo-ofiai Bia>K<ov aKiyrfTa; to yap airdo~a<; Ta? e'/cet Bvo-yepeia<; KaTaXeyeiv ovBev erepov eo~Tiv, rj ireXayo<; dvafierpeiv. 567. Kai yap orav Tt? avro? Travrbs Kadapevo-T] Trddovs, o t&v dSvvaTcov iariv iva rd t&v aXXcov eiravopdmo-ri irralo-fiaTa, fivpia (nrofiiveiv dvayKa^erai 25 Beivd. irpoo-TedevTwv Be Kai t&v OMelcav voo~rffiaT<ov, 6ea
7 uireiSero xy' vulg H 9 irpovoov/ievoi fxz Trporoovfierot ab henr oliv [| 15 Koi /iij ire/Myneceu' yz vulg 1| 16 ttjv tuv aWwv i

1. o6SeU.../iii 7ropox.] 'no one but a madman.'
4. 4t4\8oi] Cp. i 3 wbBev iTrj\$e tois ivSpiciv iKelvots £v0v/Mi6ijiiai kt\.
8. obdi ipwai kt\.] ' did not even allow it to grow up.'
9. irpovoovnev] 2 Cor. viii 2 1 : cp. Rom. xii 17.
19. p.4xpt rlvos kt\.] ' how long

shall I continue my pursuit 0/ the unattainable?' For /i^xP1 CP- o^« tary M^Xp* roirov ii 1 (note). \u!>kuv &KtxvTa is a Homeric phrase: //. xvii 75 "Ektop, vvd ab p\kv wSe Bias aKixyra Siiixuv.
12. /caflapeidrj;] Cp. naOapeiav iii 9 (note).
2$. Bio] present imperative of 9e.au = dcaaBai. The active form

VI. ix]

DE SACERDOTIO

1 59

tt)v a/3vao-ov r&v ttovcov kcu t&v (ppovnBav, Kal ocra trdo-)(eiv avdyKrj twv re olaeuov Kal twv dWorpimv /3ovKofievov Trepiyevecr&cu xaxeov. X. 568. Nvv Be, <f>rjo-iv, ov Bel croi irovtov, ovBe <f>povriBa<; e^et<s Kara o-avTov wv; "E^to fiev, e<pr)v, Kal vvv. 569. II w? yap eo~Tiv, avdpwwov 5 ovra Kal tov iroXifW^dov tovtov ftiovvra fiiov, cfrpovTiBoov dtnjWd'^dai Kal dycovia? ; dXX' ovk eo~Tiv Xcrov, et? TreXayoi aireipov ep,Treo~eiv, Kal iroraphv tvapatrXeiv tocovto ydp tovtcov KaKeivav t&v fypovTiBwv to fieo-ov. S7°- Hvv {*&» ydp el fiev Bvvr)6eir]v Kal eTepoi? yeveadai xprjcrifios, fiov- 10 Xoifirjv dv Kal avT0<s, Kal 7roXXj?? p.01 tovto epyov eiiyfis' el Be ovk eo~Tiv eTepov bvv)o~ai, ifiavTov yovv edv eyyevrjTai Biaaooaat, Kal tov k\vBo>vo<; e^eXeiv, dpKeo~dr\o~opMi TovTip. 571. EtTa tovto p.eya oiet, (prjalv, elvar oXo>? Be Kal (ymOrjcreaOai, vop.i£ei<;, eTepcp p.r)Bevl yev6fievo<; %prjo-i(io<; ; 15 572. E5 Kal «aXw?, e<j>rjv, e'iprjKas' ovBe ydp avTo? tovto trio-Teveiv e^co, on aa^eaOai eveaTi tov ovBev et? tt)v tov TrXrjalov Kap-vovTa amTr\piav. ovBe yap eKelvov tov Bel\aiov <!)vr]o~e tl to fir) fieimaai to TakavTov ' aA.X' aird>\.eo~e to /j.t) irkeovdo-at Kal BnrXovv irpocreveyKeiv. 573- II\^i» 20 aXX' eirieiKeaTepav fiot olfiat Trjv Tifiojpiav eaeo~6ai iyKa\ov/iev(p, Bid n fir) Kal eVe'/aou? eawaa, r) Bid tL Kal eTepov; Kal ep,avTov trpoaairmXeo-a, ttoXv yelpoav yevo-

4 ovSe ffv irovov ovSe (ppovrtSas exets girw ovSe <rv trovuv ovSe (ppovrtSas exetv c ovSets Got twv irovtov tovtwv aywv ovSe (ppovTtSas exeis x berl vulg || 6 tov fiox^ypov y || 15 erepuv vulg || 19 a\\a (ecu airu\e<re z vulg || 20 ra pi) vXeovatrat acy franc vulg || wpoffayayetv cfy || 22 t\ et Kai erepovs x vulg || 23 iro\v] + yap z

belongs to late Greek: see Veitch Greek Verbs, s.v. Beioiiai.
X. The bishop who fails to do his duty will be far more severely punished by God than if he had shrunk from a task beyond his powers.
3. oi Set ktX.] Cp. vi 12 init. vvv p.iv el Kal jtoXXoB p.01 Set irbvov.
It is probable that ov Set <r<x was

first corrupted into oiSels 001 (see critical note) and that iyiiv was then interpolated to make a construction for otfSefs.
12. £iu> iyyh.\ ' if it be possible.' 18. iK&vov rbv Se(X.] Matt. xxv. »4 sqq. 22. 8<A rl ktX.] i.e. by being asked the question why I did not save others.

l6o

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. x

fievos fiera ttjv TocravTrjv Tiftrjv. vvv fiev yap Toaavrrjv eaeaQai /xoi irto-Tevw rr)v KoXaaiv, oo~tjv dtranel twv dfiaprrjfiarcov to fieyeOos' fiera Be to Be^aadai ttjv dp-^r)i', ov BnrXi)v fiovov ical TpnrXrjv, aXXa ical iroXXairXacriova, 5 tw re TrXeLovas oicavBaXio~ai, ical tu> fiera fiel^ova Tip,r)v irpoaicpovaai tg> TerifirjicoTi 0ew. XI. 574- ^ta TOt tovto ical rwv IcrparjXiTwv o-(poBporepov Karrjyopwv, tovtw Belicvvcriv avTovs fiei^ovos SvTai /coXdo~eo»; d£lov<;, ra> fiera to? Trap avTov yevop.eva<; ei? civtov'; Tf/cto? apaprelv, 10 7TOT6 fiev Xeywv' IIX^ vp.d<s eyvcov ex traawv twv qbvXwv TJys 7?7?, Bia tovto e/cBuajaw e$> vfidt to? do~e/3ela<; vp,wv. TroTe Be' "EXa/Sop etc twv vlwv v/mwv et? Trpo<prjra<;, ical ix twv veavlaicwv v/jlwv ets dyiacrp,6v. 575- Kat 7r/"' r<*>v ·n-poa^Twv Beljjat fiovXo/Mevos, oti, to dfiapTrjfiaTa fiel^ova, 15 iicBe^eTao iroXXdi ttjv Tifiwplav, otccv inro Taiv lepewv yivrjTai, rj orav inro twv IBiwtwv, irpoaTaTTei ToaavTTfv virep twv lepewv TrpoadyeaOai rrjv Ovaiav, oarjv inrep 7ravT0<s tov Xaov. tovto Be oiBev erepov BrjXovvTos eo~Tiv, r) oTi fiel£ovo$ /3o7)0ia<; BeiTai to tov lepews rpavfiara, 20 ical ToaavT7]<i, 6V17? ofiov to iravTos tov Xaov. fiel^ovoi Be ovk dv iSeiTO, el fir) ^aXeirwrepa r)v ^aXeTrwrepa Be ylverai, ov Trj <pvo-ei, dXX inro t?)<> a^ia? tov ToXfiwvTOs aind lepewv (3apov/Aeva. 57^- K«' Tt Xeyw tov? avSpa? Toiii tt)v XeiTovpylav fiertovTas ; at yap 6vyaTepe<; twv 25 lepewv, at? ovBel<; 717)09 ttjv lepwavvqv X0709, 0/1.0)9 Bid to iraTpiicov a^iwfia twd avTWv dp.apT7]/j,aTwv ttoXv Twcpo-

1 om Tt/irjv vvv pev yap Toaavrrjv z || n ras apaprias yz (ut LXX) || I4 T/HMpTITOlv] + C7T1 BvdUHV Z E7TI TWV 8vUt{0V y Vulg || 11 Tt] oftO X VUlg

XI. The bishop, if he commits an offence, is visited with far heavier punishment than a layman.
10. T\ty i/xas] Amos iii i. 12. IXafiov] Amos ii n. 'I raised up... of your young men for Nazirites' RV. 16. ToawiiTT)v...T. 9.] Lev. iv3, 14. 18. toCto Si kt\.] 'this simply

proves thai the ivounds' etc., ovSkv irepov being accus. "after SijXoCctos: cp. ra p.iv fflfiara. airopovvTos ii i (note).
24. ffvyaripes t. i.] Lev. xxi 9. For these the penalty was death by burning.
26. t&v airQv o/i.] 'the same sins ' as others commit.

VI. xi]

DE SACERDOTIO

l6l

Tepav vire'xpvai rrjv np.wplav Kal to fiev trXrififieXrifia laov avrais Kal Tat? twv IBiwtwv dvyarpdai, tropveia yap dp,<f>OTepa, to Be iirirLfiiov iroXXw tovtcov j^aXeTrwrepov. 6pa<; p.e(F oar)? aoi BeiKwai, tt)<; trepiovo-La<; 6 Oeb<;, on ttoXKw trXeiova rwv dpypp.evwv diraiTel rbv ap^ovra 5 Tip.wp'iav. ov yap Br/ trov 6 rrjv iiceivov Ovyarepa BC eicelvov p.et,^6vw<; rwv aXXwv KoXa^tov tov ical eKetvrj t?}? trpoa6r)Kr]<; twv ftaadvwv atnov %o~i)v tois aWot? eio-irpdi;erat Bikt/v, dXXd troXXw p,ei£ova. $77- Kat fiaXa ye elicoTox;. ov yap els avrbv "irepitaTarai fiovov r) ^rjfila, 10 aXXa Kal Ta? twv daOeveo-Tepwv kcu eh avrbv jSXeirbvTwv KaraftdXXei i/rin^a?. $7%- Toirro ical 6 'Ie£e*«r)\ BiBd^at, ^ovXop.evo'i, Bitcrrrjcriv air dXXrjXwv tt)v twv Kpiwv Kal Trjv twv Trpof&aTtov Kplcnv. XII. 579- *Apa aot, Bokovp.ev Xoyov fyovra "TrecfyoftfjcrOai <f>6f3ov ; 777309 yap tois 15 elpj)/j,evoi<;, vvv fiev el Kal troXXov fioi Bel irovov, 777309 to fir) Br) KaTaywvicrdr)vai reXeov bird twv tjj? 'tyvxV'i traQwv, aXX 0/10)9 dveypp,atr twv irovwv, Kal ov <f>evyw tov aywva. 580. Kat yap vtrb KevoBo^las dXiaKOfiai fiev Kal vvv, dvacpepw Be vroXXdw Kal on edXwv, avvopw' ean Be ore 20 Kal eiriTtfitS rfj BovXwdelo-rf ifrvxjj. 5^1. 'Kiridv/ilai fioi

3 om iroXXu fx || 4 tijs vjrepjSoX?js xy' vulg || 6 exurris c || 8 tois jtoXXou cfxy vulg II u 6Vi|ai bcz franc henr || 1 8 tov irovov y vulg

2. rat! t. ISiut. 0.] Deut. xxii 21. In this case also the penalty was death, but by stoning.
4. fied' Sffrjs ktX.] ' with what fullness ' (of illustration) : cp. ix repiovatas i 4 (note).
5. tot apxoft.] i.e. t) tows apxofiivovs.
7. t6v ko.1 ixelvQ ktX.] ' will exact from him, to whom she owes the increase of the punishment, merely the same penalty as from others'
12. 'Iefeic.] Ezek. xxxiv 17: ' Behold I judge as well the rams as the he-goats ' RV.

XII. The real reason why Chrysostom drew back at the last moment was his anxiety and alarm at the thought of undertaking so heavy a responsibility as the office of bishop. He dwells on the faults of his own character: e.g. ill-temper and arrogance: and by the similes (1) of the king's daughter and (2) of the opposing armies, shews his unfitness to govern the Church,
15. \6yov (xovra . . . tpbfiov] 'a reasonable apprehension'
20. a.va<j>£po>] intransitive, ' / recover.'

N. C.

II

1 62

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. XII

irpoarirltrTovaiv aroiroi Kal vvv dXXa dpyorepav avdtTTOvat ttjv <pX6ya,T<iov o<f>6aXfj,aJv twv e^wOev ovk eypvroiv eTTiXajBeaOat, tt}? tov irvpos vXr/<;. 582. Tov Be icaicws tov Beiva Xeyeiv, teal Xeyofievov aicoveiv, dir^Way/uii 5 travTeXoo*;, rwv BiaXeyofievmv ov irapovrcav ov yap Br) ovtoi oi toi^oi BvvaivT av d<f>elvai <p(ovr]v. 583. 'Att' ovyl Kal rrjv opyrjv ofioicos BvvaTov Bia<f>vyelv, Kairoi ye t(Sp TrapofjvvovTwv ovk ovtcov. (ivq/ti) yap iroXXaKts dvBpmv aTOTTtov Trpoatreaovaa icai rwv vtr avTwv yevo10 fiivcof i^otBetv fioi tt)v KapBiav Tcoiet' irXrjv dXX' ovk et? reXo?, ray^eax; yap avTrjv <f>Xeyfiaivovaav KaTaaTeXXofiev, Kal ireidofiev r)av)(a%et,v ewrwres, on Xiav do~vp.§opov Kal Trj<: eo-^a.T7]<i adXioTrjTos, ra oiKela a^evras /caica, to, tu>v ttXtjo-iov irepiepyd^eo-dai. dXX' ovk els to TrXrjOos eXOmv 15 Kal rai? /j.vpiai<> atroXrj^del'i Tapa%al<;, 8vvrjo~o[j,ai TavTijs atroXaveiv rfj<; vov&eaias, ovBe toii? ravra TraiBaywyovvTas Xoyio-p,ov<! evpelv. 5^4- AXX &airep 01 Kara Kpi)fivd>v vtto twos pev/j,aTO<; rj Kal irepa<; dvdyKTjs doOovfievoi, Trjv fiev dvwXeiav, et? rjv reXevrwci, trpoopdv ovvavrai, fiorj20 Qeiav Be Tiva etrivoelv ovk eyovaiv ovtco Kal avTO? et's tov 7roXvv twv itaQwv 66pvf3ov e/j.Trea'mv, ttjv fiev KoXaaiv KaO' eKaarrjv avfjofievrjv fioi rrjv r/fiepav Bwrjaofiat crvvopav, iv i/iavTa Be yeveadai, KaOdirep vvv, Kal eirt,Tifir)o-ai irdvrodev Tot? voar/fiaat Xvttwcti tovtois ovk e&' 6/xot'a>?

I jrpoffiriirTowriJ'] + /lev z vulg || 2 tuiv otpB. e£ui6ev yz || 12 aavfHpuvov xy' vulg || 18 1) /col erepws vulg || 23 Kaffawep /coi vvv yz vulg

1. dVojroi] ' vicious ' : cp. \07tff/tos dYoTros vi 3 (note).
1. twv tfadcv kt\.J ' my outward eyes being unable to obtain any
fuel for the flame'' (of passion): cp. vi 3 5ta rd /ifj Trpoo-Keiffdai £fw0ei' ri)r rijs Oeupias ii\iiv rp <p\oyl. Tav *{. b<pd. are opposed to the inward eye, 6 riji if/vxTJs 6<t>Oa\/j.6s of iii 14 init.
6. ovtoi oi to?x<>'] Cp. vi 7 6

oprnpos ovros kt\. (note), 11. <p\eyfi.. Karaar.} The same
phrase is found in iv 3 (note). 14. Trcpiepy.] 'to meddle with ' :
cp. iii 17. 23. iv ifiavrtp 7.] 'to come to
myself: cp. iv cfiavru elvai iv I sub fin. (note).
24. XuTTiSffi] For the position of this word cp. irapo(Svu to driplov iipepovv iii 14 (note).

VI. ]

 5000

1 63

 ,   . 8.    ?    ,       ,      ·       
,  '     ,    . $86. ",   ,   }  ,     ,  ,     ,      ,     ,      ,                    , 6   ,      ·    ,
     ' ,      ,   ,        . 5^7·       ;  ,   ·  ,    · 
, '   , ,    · ,     20   ·   . 88. 
      ?/       ,   ,        . -

      || 5 --  >  || 1 1 \   II 1 5   || 1 8   || 20  ]     || 23   ||    

5· ' \$] .  7 . ().
. ] .. : = :.     8  6 ^>     .
7· .  .] . . . . . II 64         -$ : . 1>. 799 

°- *' .. . $  6 .] =.
   ,  &5\5     1>§2   .
8. ] .   4 ().
11. %  . \.] .   \  8 () .

II 2

1 64

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. xn

TavOa Be Kaffrifiivm, fiera iroX\.rj<; fiev Kal outgk viroTayr\aerai tt/<? f3t,a<>' VTroTayrfaeTai B ovv o/mo<; tij tov Oeov yapvTi, Kal r>75 vXa/c?i<; avrois ovBev ecrrai TrXeov. 589. Aid ravra tov oIkutkov <f>vXaTTa> tovtov, Kal dirp6iTO<s, Kal S davvovo~lao-TO<;, Kal aKoivobvrjTos · Kal /Mvpias erepa<? ToiavTas fj,fiyjrei<i d/coveiv dve^o/u,ai, ^Seto? fiev av ai/Ta? a.TroTpiiJrd[i.evo<;, ra> Be firj BvvaaOai BaKvofievo? Kal dXymv. ovBe yap eviropov fioi, ofiiXrjTiKov re bfiov yeveaQai, Kal ctt* ttJ? ·7rapovai]<i aa^iaXeta? jieveiv. oV b Kal avrbv o~e 10 TrapaicaX<5, tov virb TocravTrft; Bvo-%epeia<; dTreiXijfi/ievov eXeelv /a&XXov, r) BiaftdXXetv.
590. 'AXX' oiBeirco ere Trelffofiev. ovkovv Spa Xoiwov, b fiovov el%ov aTropprjrop, 77-pos ere Kal tovto e/cfiaXelv. ical io~a<s /j,ev olttigtov elvai Boljei 7roXXol<;' iya> Be avrb 15 ovBe ovraxi els fiecrov eveyxeiv alcr}(yvd^aofiai. el yap Kal ·7Tovr)pa<; o-vveiBrfo-ems ical fivpiwv dfiapTr/fidTcov eXey^oi; to Xeyofievov, tov fieXXovTO? f)p.d<; Kplveiv deov trdvTa elBoTOS a/cpt/Sw?, tl TrXeov rjfuv eic ttjs t&v dv0pd>iro)v dyvoia<s eyyevecrOai Bw-qaeTai; 591. Ti ovv eo~Ti to 20 drroppriTov ; dirb tjJ? r)fiepa<i exelvrj^, iv rj TavTrjv eveOrjKas fioi tt)V VTroyfnav, iroXXdicis eKivBvvevcre fioi TrapaXvdijvai to a&fia TeXeov, toctovto<s fiev <f>6/3o<;, rocravTi) Be ddv/iia Kivrkoyk /mov ttjv tyvxyv. 592- Tr)9 yap XpierTov vv/i<f>T)<; tt)v Bo^av evvo&v, ttjv dytao-vvrjv, to koXXos to trvev-

I p.era ttoWtjs fiev viroTayijs, etrrat 5' ovv o/aws ttj tov Oeov xaPtTt c I 2 tijs /Sias] om ttjs y vulg || 4 airpoo-iros c || 12 upa fiot \oiirov z vulg || 1 7 to Xeyo/uyoy] + i) bexz vulg

1. xal outms] 'even so': i.e. in spite of the assistance which he derives from isolation.
3. ttjs i\a,K7js kt\.] 'they will gain nothing save their barking': i.e. nothing but the chance to make themselves heard. Contrast the construction below r£ irKiov T\yXv £k T?js...ayroLas eyyevioSai dw/io-erai; ' what advantage can accrue to us

from men's ignorance?' 12. wpa...^/t/9aX«j'] 'it is time
to declare. ' 21. iiro^/lav] 'suspicion': i.e.
that he would be forcibly consecrated : see i 3.
22. d0t>/iia] cp. i 3 (init.). 23. rijs yap Xp. >>.] Cp. tou XpttTToC tt\v vvp.<pT]v iii 6 (note).

VI. xii]

DE SACERDOTIO

l6$

(juitikov, rr)v o~vveo~w, rr)v evKoarfiiav, Kal rd ifiavrov \oyi£6/ievo<; Kaicd, ov BieXifnravov ixeivrjv re irevOwv Kal ifiavTov, Kal arkvwv o~vve%co<; Kal Biairop&v 717)0? efiavrbv e\eyov 593. Tt? dpa ravra avve&ovkevae ; ri roaovrov rjfiaprev r) rod deov iKKkqaia ; ri rrfKiKovro irapco^vve 5 rov avrrj<; Beo-rrorrjv, to? r<5 rravrmv drifiordra rrapaBodr)vat, e/jLol, Kal roo-avrrjv virofietvai alcr^wqv ; 594- Tavra iroXkaicis Kar ifiavrbv \oyi£op,evo<;, Kal rod \iav drorrov fiTjBe rr)v ev6vpvqo~iv Bvvdfievo<s eveyKeiv, &arrep oi rrapaTrXfjyes eKeifirjv ayavr)?, ovre opav ovre aKoveiv ri Bvvd- 10 jievos. t?}? Se dftrixavias fie t??? roo-avrr)<; d<pielo"r)>;, Kal yap eariv ore Kal VTrefJLO~raro, BieBe%ero Sd/cpva koL adv/iia' Kal fierd rbv r&v BaKpvwv Kopov, dvreio-yei irdXiv o $d/3o?, rapdrrav Kal Oopvfiwv Kal BiaaeLwv /lot, rr)v Bidvoiav. 595- Toaavrr] £d\y rbv rrapeXdovra avvefy>v 15 ypovov o~v Be r)yvoet.<;, Kal iv yaXrfvr) fie Bidyeiv evofu^es. dXXa vvv o~ol drroKaXv-fyai rreipdaofiai rbv j(et,fioiva 777? ifir)<; i|ru^9* rdya yap fioi Kal airb rovrov avyyvdtay, rd eyKXrifiara d<pei<i. 7r&>? ovv arot,, 7rw? aiirbv eKKaXvip-ofiev ; ei /lev o~a<f>a)<; e#e\ot? IBeiv, erepcos ovk evrjv, a\\' r) rrjv 20 KapBlav diroyv/ivcbo-avra rr)v epvrjv. erreiBr) Be rovro dBvvarov, Bi d/ivBpa<; rivb<; et/eoVo?, a>? av olos re w, ireipdaofiai o~oi rbv rr)<; d8vp,la<; reto<; viroBel^at, Kairvov av Be sk tt)? elKovos rr)v ddvfitav avWeyeiv fiovrjv.

3 e/xavrov ] + TaXavifav bcfxz vulg || 4 e^eyov] + ravra z vulg |] 1 1 a(pei<n}$ z vulg || 17 fKKa\v\pofiai y eKKaKvfwpiev vulg || 20 ovk av eo) bcfxyz franc || 21 yv/wu<ravTa y vulg yvjivwaavTi. afz || 24 ffuMe-ye Ga*cfox vulg <roi Be eveo-riv ck ttjs tixoms--ffuXX^eix a'bdehlpstz <rv 5e ck ttjs «(coKos...<ru\\e7o/urriv opa mn || /iovoi> Gabdeo

9. 7ra^o7r\^y6s] 'in an epileptic fit: cp. Tapair\r)£la 'madness ' iv 1.
10. dxa^s] 'mute. ' 13. Saxptiuv Kbpov\ Eurip. Alcestis 185 ivel Si iro\\ui> SaKpiav el^ex n6pov. 24. <n;XA£yeu'] infinitive for im-

perative. The somewhat unusual construction explains the various corruptions in the text (see critical note) : thus aiWeye is clearly a gloss on <rvXKiyetv, while in other MSS. IveoTi is interpolated (with change of <ri to aol).

1 66

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. xn

596. "T-rroOcofieda elvai tivi /mvtjo-ttjv tov trdat)^ rr)? £<£* rjXito Keip.evq<; yrj<} /3ao-iXevovTo<; Ovyarepa' TavTt)v re TTjV KOpTjV KaXXot T 6%IV ap/T]")(a.VOV, 0I0V Kai TT)V av6p(oire'tav virepfiaLvetv (f>vo~iv, teal tovtco to twv yvvatKtov S airaarav <j>vXov i/c ttoXXov tov Biao-Trj/J,aTO<; viicav Kai tyvxy<> apeTrjv TocavTr/v, a>? Kai to tcov dvBpwv yevos, T&v Te yevopevcov t&v re eo-op,evmv ttots, ttoXXS too fieTpm KaToiriv d<pelvaf Kai Trdvrav fiev VTrepfirjvai <ptXoo-o<f>La<r opov<; rrj t&v TpoTrcov evKOO~p,ia, Tracrav Be icpvtyai ad>jxaTO<i 10 wpav To! t?;? ot«eta? oyjreax; KaXXei. 597- Tov Be tout?;? p,V7]o~Trjpa, p,f) Bid TavTa p,6vov irepiKaieo-dai ttj? irapBevov, dXXa Kai %WjOi? tovtcov irdayeiv ti 7rpo? ainrjv, Kai to irdOei tovtco tov<; fiaviKcoTdrov; twv irdnroTe yevofievwv a7roKpvy}rat epaaTOiV. 59^- EiTa fieTa^v tS <plXTpa> Kaio15 fievov aKOvaal iroQev, oti ti}i» Oavp.aaTr}v epwp,evr)v eKeivrjv twv evreXav rt? Kai direppifip,eva>v dvBpwv, Bvayevr)^ Kai to oSp,a dvdirr)po<; Kai irdvTcov twv ovtwv po^OripoTaTO^, fieXXoi Trpbi ydfiov dyayeaOai. 599- *Ajt>a aoi p.iKpov ti p,epo<; t?)? r/fieTepas 6Bvvr)<; Trapeo-T^cra/Mev ; Kai apxei 20 fie-ftpi tovtov aTYjo-ai Trjv eiKOva ; ttj<; /xev dOv/iias eveKev dpKeiv olfiac Kai yap Bid tovto /jlovov aiiTrjv irapeiXrjfyafiev. 'Cva Be o~oi xal tov <po/3ov Kai T775 e/crrX^ea)?

1 v<f>' 7J\ioi> y vulg || 3 avBpwirivqv z vulg || 15 Kai axovcai z vulg || 16 Kai ovayevi)i z vulg || 17 om twv ovtwv fx || 18 ayeaBai vulg || 19 irapajrrioa to fiTpov fyz

5. ck woWov tov 5.] Lat. longo intervallo.
8. KaT&wiv atpeivai] ' to leave behina": cp. i 1 toctoOtov . . A(peivai KaT/nriv (note).
ib. 0iXo<ro0/as] Cp. <t>CKoao<jiav i 1 (note).
13. toi>5 p.aviK. ...airoKp.] ' to put in the shade even the most passionate of lovers ' : for liavtxis cp. ad Theodorum lapsum I 1 1 c, and Field's note on Homm. in 1 Thess. 443 D. a,woKpi\j/ai is like Kpi\(iai just above.

14. p.eTa%v...Kai6/ji.'} 'while he was being consumed by lave for her,' (plXrpov is more usually a ' lovepotion 'or ' philtre.'
16. ei)r. Kai airefip. av.~\ 'some vile outcast': cp. foTM 6 ovvoikGiv fii) twv cvtcXwv tls fiySt twv airefipi/Apivwv quod regulares feminae etc. 259 A. We are reminded of the ' little bald tinker,' Plat. Rep. 496 A, who marries his master's daughter,
20. M^X/" ktX.] 'to end the parallel (simile) here.'

VI. xii]

DE SACERDOTIO

1 67

viroBei^w to fierpov e<p' erepav irdKiv ieofiev viroypa<prjv. 600. Kal eo-Tio (TTparoTrehov etc ire^wv Kal 'nnrewv Kal vavp.a'^wv o~vvei\eyp,evov dvBpwv Kal KaXvirrerw fiev ttjv daXarrav 6 rwv rpirjpcov dpid//.b<;, KaXviTTeTw Be rd twv ireBiwv ttXtjOt) Kal ra<! twv opwv Kopv<pd<} a! twv ire^wv 5 Kal tTnrewv (fraXayyef 601. Kai avTiXa/nreTw p,ev r)Xl,q> twv ottXwv 6 %a\Kb<;, Kal Tals eKeiOev Trep,Trop,vai<; aKTicriv 77 twv TrepiKe<pa\ai(2v Kal twv dairlBwv avTafyieaOw p,apfiapvyij' 0 Be twv BopaTWV ktvitos Kai o twv vwkwv XpefieTio-/j,o<; Trpos ai)Tov (pepeaOw tov ovpavov Kal fiijre 10' 0d\ao~<ra (paive&dw p-r)Te yfj, a\Xa xaXKos Kal o~iBt)po<; TravTa%ov. 602. ' AvmrapaTaTTecrffwaav Be ai/TOis Kal TToXefiiot, dyptoi, Ttve<; dvBpei Kal dvij/Mepof evearTrjKeTW Be -SjBri Kal 6 tj)? o~vp,j3oXrj<i Kaipot. 603. Ewa dptrdo-a<i Tt? eljaltpvijs fieipaKiov twv ev dypw Tpa<pevTwv Kal T779 15 Trr)KTi,Bo<; Kal t^? KaA.au/j07r0? irXeov elBoTwv ovBev, KaOoTrXi^eTw fiev avTO 6V\ot? %o\koI<;, 604. wepiayeTw Be to o-TpaToireBov atrav, Kal BeiKVVTW Xo%ov<; Kal Xo^ayoixs, TO^oTas, a<pevBovriTa<;, Ta^inp^ov;, aTpaTrjyoix;, 07rXn-a?, i-jnrea<i, aKovTiaTa*;, Tpirfpeis, rptrfpap^ovs, toii? e/cei 20 Tre<ppayp,ivov<; o~TpaTia>Ta<;, twv ev Tat? vavalv diroKeip.evwv p,T)yavt)p.aTwv to TrXfjdos' 605. BeiKVVTW Be Kal Trjv twv TroXefiiwv trapaTa^iv airaaav, Kal 6'i|ret? diro-

4 KoXuTrreTwaav bfmnpyz vulg || 7 amirc/iTO/ievais fxz || 1 5 om ev z || 16 eiSos y || 19 <T(j>ev$ovi<TTas c || 22 om SeiKvvTui--km jrXi;0os z

3. yau/iaxw"] Cp. iv 4 ravfiixV (note).
4. KaXvirriru) S4] With Diibner I retain this, the reading of the best MSS. The verb would of course be normally in the plural, but the distance of the plural subject (a! <p£\ayycs) from its verb, and the fact that KaXuirWrw precedes its subject, will account for the anomaly (schema Pindaricum).
5. wXi}07j] For w\rjdos used of magnitude instead of number · see

I» and S., who quote ireSiov irX?/0os iweipov from Herodotus. There is thus no need of the conjecture 7rXdTij (Boys).
13. tvearriK. ictX.] 'and suppose that the time for the conflict is at hand.'
16. njKriSot] a sort of shepherd's pipe joined of several reeds, like Pan's pipes: L. and S. s.v. : KaXaiporos=' shepherd's crook.'
23. iirorp.] 'awful': lit. 'illomened.'

1 68

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. xil

Tpoiraiow Tivds, ical cricevrjv ottXwv e^r/WaypAvrfv, ical ir\r)Oo<; airetpov, ical cpdpayyas ical tcprfpvovs /Sa#ei? ical hvo-)(wpta<; opwv 606. heiKVVTW 8e en irapa, T019 evavtIok ical ireTopevows Xmroxn Btd twos payyaveias, ical 5 09r\tTa? Si depos <pepopevov<s, ical iracrrjs yor)Teia<; hvvap.Lv T ical iBeav. 607. KaraXeyerco Be ical t«? tov iro~kep.ov avp,<popd<;- twv aicovTimv to ve(po<>, twv /3e\<ov Ta$ vo^dBas, ttjv TroWr/v d^Xiiv eicelvrjv ical Tr)v dopacriav, Trjv £o<j>wBeCTTaTriv vvKTa, rjv to twv TofjevpaTwv crvviaTrjcri irXrjOos, 10 airocTTpefyov rrj ttvkvotijti, Ta? aKTivas, Trjv icoviv ov% f)TTov tov ctkotovs tow 6<p6aXpov<; dp,avpovcrav, tovs tojv aifiaTCOv %eip,dppov<i, twv ttctttovtwv Tas olp,wyd<;, twv ecrTCOTasv Toi><; d\a\ayp,ov<;, twv icetpevwv rav crwpeias, Tpo^oi><{ a'ijMni, /3aTTTi£op,evov<;, Xirnrovs avTols ava/3aTai<; 15 Trpr)vei<} cpepofiivovs airo tov ifKrjOovs twv tceifievwv veicpwv, Trjv yr)v (pvpBrjv airavTa e%ovcrav, alfia ical To£a ical fteXrj, ittttwv 6ir\d<; ical dvdpwirwv ice<f>a\d<; opov Keifievas, ical fSpayjLova ical Tpo^ov, ical icvqplBa ical crTr)do<} Biaicoirev, eyice<pd\ov<; ^icpecri TrpoaireTrXaapevovs, diclBa /3e'Xot/? eic20 Keic\acrp,evr)v ical ocpdaXpov e%ovaav ep.irerrepovrip.evov. 608. KaTaXeyeTW ical Ta tov vavTiicov irdQrj' Tpir/pei? Ta<; pev ev p,eaoi<; dvairTopevas toi? vBaai, Ta? Be ai)Tol<i 07rA.tVat? icaTaBvopevas' tov tcoj/ iiBaTwv r)%ov, tov twv vavTwv Oopvfiov, Trjv twv crTpaTiwTwv fiorjv, toji/ KvpaTav

3 Su^xeptias a franc henr || 13 touj awpovs vulg ras Kpavyas x || 14 cufiacri c || 18 (jpaxiovas vulg || km rpaxy^ov mnoxy' berl vulg || 19 eyKeK\curp,ev7jv cxz

1. itpiXkay.] 'unusual," strange': cp. Homm. in Matt. 6 B 1%-tfiCkayp.iva ko\ Kaiva, 144 C rpairi^Q ofirws il-riWayfitvTi.
4. p.ayyav.]'jugglery.' 12. oi/i. xe<-M-] Cp. elSes &i> oi X«/n(i/5pous aXp.i.Twv vi 13. 14. afrrotsavap.]' riders and all': cp. airols dvSpdaiv 'crews and all' Hdt. vi 93 etc.

16. (pipdyv] 'in confusion,' 'pellnull' (<j>vpw) : cp. ipSrjv iii 4 (atpa).
18. rpoxdv] This word suits the context better than Tpdxy\oi> (see critical note). Everything is in confusion (cp. (pipSriv): a man's arm, the wheel of a chariot, are side by side,
19. dxlda jS^Xous /kk.] ' the head of an arrow broken off.'

VI. xii]

DE SACERDOTIO

169

Kal t&v alfidrcov fiiyvv/Mevov tov a<ppov, Kal o/xov Tot? 7rXot'ot5 itreiaiovTa trdaf tou? em, tcov KaTao-TpwpAnrmv veicpovs, T0119 KaTairovTi^ofievov;, tow eTri7rkeovTa<;, tov? e»s Toil? alyiaXovs eK^pao-aofievov<i, tov? evSov to£? Kv/xaat, irepi/cXv^ofievow;, Kal rats vavtrlv dirofypcmovTat; Trjv 6&6v. 5 609. Kal irdaat dicpi/3a)<; BiSdgas to? toO iroXep-ov rpay<p8la<;, irpocrriOeru) Kal rd Trjs alyyiaXcocnas Seivd, xal Trjv 7ravTO? Oavdrov ^aXetrmTepav SovXeiav. 610. Kal TauTa elirwv KeXeverco tov ittttov avaj3at,veiv evdew;, Kal tov o-rpaTOTreSov TravTos eKeivov arpaTriyeiv. 6ll. *Apa 10 otet, irpot Trjv ScoLKfjaiv eKeivrjv dpKeaeiv tov jieipaKiaKov eKelvov, dXX' ovk diro Trpd>Tq<; oi/rea)? evdeax; diprjaeiv Trjv ip-v^r/v ; XIII. 612. Kal p,rj fie vop,lo-y<; eiraipeiv to Trpdyfia rw Xoya>' fiijB' oti t& o~ti>p.a.Ti tovtw Kadd-irep tlvI Beo-/M(OTr]pi,a) KaTaKXeio-dkvTes, twv aopaTcav ovBev 15 Bvvdfjbeda l&elv, fieydXa Ta elpr\p,eva elvai vofii^e. woXii yap TavTr)<; tt)? p,d%r}<s fiei^ova, ttoXv Kal <ppiKG)8eo-Tepav etSe? av, el tov SiaftoXov Tr)v £o<po)&eo-TdTrjv irapaTatjiv Kal Trjv fiaviaBr] crvfiftoXrjv tovtois Tot? 6<\>6aXp,ol<; ISelv r)8vvrj0T)s 7TOT6. 613. Ou yap ^oXko^ eKel Kal o~l,Sripo<;, 20 ovhe XtnToi Kal dpp,aTa Kal rpo^ol, ovSe irvp Kal /3eXr], ravra to, opaTa' dXX' eTepa ttoXv tovtcov <poj3epd)Tepa lifiyav^fJMTa. oi) Set tovtoi<; tois 7ro\e/itot5 doopaKos oitBe

1 cu/j.a.Tun>] + o/iov yz vulg || 7 Setva] /ca/ca yz || n Tpot ttjx Sirryri<nv IM>vi)v acfmnpux franc oliv vulg || to /jieipaicuTKioy eiceivo y || 13 fnrroi fie voiuo-qs x vulg || 16 po/iife] vofitar]S vulg || 17 /ieifopa kcu ippiK. yz vulg <ppiKtodearepa x || 19 avp.^o\i]v"\ ^ov\i)v x || 2 1 /3e\i)] + ouSc z

2. KaTaarpufidTuv] 'decks' 4. IvSov] sc. rrjs 0aXd<nr?js. Tois Kvimai, ' by the waves,' goes with TrepiK\vfoiJ.ivovs. 6. rpayifSias] ' melancholy events' ' tragedies ' : cp. Plat. Legg. 8 1 7 B. XIII. The warfare conducted against us by Satan is so fierce that no mere earthly conflict could give us a true idea of it.

The foregoing description of the difficulties of the bishop's office makes a deep impression upon Basil. He implores his friend to support and assist him in his future labours: and Chrysostom readily undertakes to do so.
13. iwatpeiv . . .Tip X67<()] ' exaggerate.'

170

5055

[VI. 

,,     '          ,      ,            . 5 614.  64   ,    ,                           ,   ,     ,    ,       ,     ,     ,     ,  ' '    . 6 5-        1 5 , '      ,       .         ,      ,         ·     2 ,     ,   ,          ,        .            ,    25 .          ,          . 66.     -
6    || 12   \ ||  /  || 22 (  || 24   § || 25 ] +  || 6    ||   

6. .~\   1$*5  ,       5 .
8. .] /-,' '.' 9· ]    .. = '  ' :   . = '  . '

12.  .. .] '' .'
8.  ] '  &,' .. &   :  5    & ^.    \\.

VI. xiii]

DE SACERDOTIO

I71

Xfjs tov rpoirov e^eTa^eiv ideXots, 7roX.11 ravTTjv atpohpoTepav Kal TroiKiXcDTepav 'iBois av. ovhe yap kXottt)<; kclI SoXov ToaavTas Tt? olBev tSea?, oaai eKeivoi o fiiapoi, TavTQ yovv Ttjv irXecova ice/crr/Tai Bvvap.iv ovre 'i'yQpav Tt? ovrco'S aKijpvKTOv BvvaiT av e^eiv 7T/30? tou? ayav iroXe- 5 fiMorarovs avra, ocrrjv 7rpo<; ttjv dvOpanretav (pvaiv 6 7rovt}p6<!. 617. Kal rrjv irpoOvfiiav Be ei tk i^era.^01, fie0' ^9 payerai iiceivos, dvOpwirow fiev evravda Kal yeXoiov TrapafiaXelv. el Be Tt? ra opyiXcorara Kal airr]viarara ratv driplwv e/cXe!;dp,evo<; dvTiriOevai OeXoi rrj 10 tovtov fiavta, irpaorara ovra Kal rjp,epd>raTa evprjo-ei 777 irapafioXfj- toctovtov ovtos irvei Ovfiov, Tat? rifierepais TTpoo-fidXXwv v|ru%at?. 618. Kal o t?)? M"X'?i? &e XP°V0'>' evravOa fiev /3/3a^v9, Kal ev t&> f3pa%el Be avT& iroXXal at dvoKco%ai' Kal yap vii^ e-7reX6ov<ra, Kal o tov <r<f>d£eiv 15 /ca/xaTo?, Kal rpo<prj<; Kaipbi Kal ttoXXcL erepa Biavairavetv tov o-rpaTicoTTjv iretpvxev, w? Kal diroBvvai rrjv iravrev%iav, Kal dvairvevcrai piKpbv, Kal o-iTeo Kal ttotw Karayjrv^at; Kal erepoit ttoXXois rrjv irpoTepav dvaKTr/o-aaOai Bvvafuv. eVi. Be tov Trovrjpov ovk ea-Ti to, oirXa KaraOeaOai irore, 20 ovk eo~Tiv vttvov apacrOat tov /3ovXop.evov aTpa>TOv peveiv hiairavToi. dvdyKt] yap, Bvolv OaTepov, rj -ireo~eiv Kal diroXeaQat yvp.vwQi.VTa, rj 8ta7rai>To? Ka6(0TrXio-p,evov etrrai/at Kal eyprjyopoTa. Kal yap eKeivos BiairavTOi; eo-Tr/Ke p,eTcL tt;? avrov irapaTa^eax;, ra? r)p£Tepa<; padv- 25

2 iSoi tij ok x || 3 0 fuaposj + Sai/uov CKeaios x o irovqpos Sai/ioiv eKetvos yz vulg || 5 8vt>Ti<reTat bcfxyz franc Svvarat vulg || 8 avBpwwois yz vulg || II ev rrj Tapapo\r] z || 16 SiavaTvevaai z || 24 km eyfniyopcvat bo KaBairK. taTurra <coi eypTp/opora eivcu x vulg

5. aniipvKTov] 'implacable'' : properly used of a war in which no herald is admitted by either side. ' AicfipvKTOS IxBpa is quoted from Plutarch.
ib. a^yax 7roXeuiur.] We might have expected the positive To\efilovs

after 0701"; but cp. iii 14 ippiKuSiirrara (note).
1 7. iravrevxiav] 'panoply.' HavoTrXfas is found at ii 2.
20. odx tan tA ktX.] ' he who wishes to remain unhurt cannot lay down his arms.'

172

CHRYSOSTOMUS

[VI. xm

fila? TrapaTtjp&v, ifkeiovd re elcrcpepav atrovBt)v et? rr)v rj/ierepav dtrmXeiav, r) et? rrjv ara>T7)piav ij/iet? rrjv eavrwv. 619. Kat to firj 6pda9at Be avTov v<f> r)p,d>v, ical to e^avivrfi eTrmOeaOai, a fia\io~ra tcov fivpicov eariv curia 5 icaicwv toi? oiik eyprjyopoo-i BiairavTos, iroXii tovtov airopdtrepov eiceivov BeiKvvai rov iroXe/Mov. 620. 'J^vravda ovv Tjfj,d<; tf&eXes arpaTr/yetv Tot? <TTpari(OTai<i rov Xptcttov ; dWd Ttp Biaf36\q> tovto t)v crTparrjyelv' orav yap 6 BiardrTeiv ical Biatcoo-fielv roils Xonrovs otpetXcov ·kov-

10 tcov direipoTaTO'; ical do-0evio-raTO<; 77, irpoBovs vtrb t»7? dnreiplas tovs irio-TevOevTas, ra 8t,a/36\a> fidWov eo-rpaTrjyqo-ev, fj rat Xpto-T«3. 621. 'AUa t'l o-TeVet? ; ti hatcpveis ; ov yap Qprpiwv d^ia rd /car efie vvv, aXX' ev<ppocrvvri<; ical %apd<;. 'AXX'
15 ov^l ical rd ep.d, tprjcriv, dWd p-vpmv d^ia raxna KoireTwv vvv yap fidXis r/8wr)0i)v avviSeiv, ol twv icaicwv fie fyyayes. 622. 'Eya> fiev yap elarjXdov "irpo<; ae, o ti iroTe virep gov irpos Toil? eyKaXovvrat; diroXoyrjo-o/x,ai,, 8eo//,evo<; p,a6eiv ffii Be p,e eKirefitrei^ erepav dv0' erepa? <j>povTt,Ba ivOefc.
20 ov yap en fioi p.eXei, Tt irpos e/ceivow; virep o~ov, aXXa tl 7rpo? rov deov virep ip,avrov ical t<Sv e/idov diroXoyrjo-o/xat KdKwv. 623. AXXa o~ov Beofiai ical dvTiftoXw, et Tt aoi LieXet twv i/j,(Sv, et Tt? irapaicXrfCTit; ev XptcTeS, et Tt irapap,v0iov dydirrji, ei riva crirXdyxya ical olKTipp,oi. ical yap
25 otSa?, on p,e fidXicrra iravrcov owto? et? tovtov tov kIvBvvov rjyayes' Xe^Pa ope^ov ical Xe^o^ ical trpaTTCov rd hvvafieva r)iMa<i dvopOovv, fiTjBe avdo-^rj 77790? yovv to ^pa^yTaTOv rjfidi airoXiTretv, aWa vvv fiaXXov rj irpoTepov KOivd<{

16 ctj olov fioBpov KaKusv fie -qyayes c || 17 on 7TOTe] + eKeivow y vulg || 20 tt\i)v a\\a vulg || 24 et ti axXayxva z || 27 /J.i) Sri avaaxt vulg

5. tovtov] i.e. warfare between man and Satan : iicelvov, that between man and man.
7. 0-rpa.T. tois irrp.] 'to lead the soldiers ' : but r$ 5ta^. trrp. below = ' to act as leader in the cause of the

devil.' 14. to, ko.t' i/ii]' my fortunes? 23. etTis irapdicXrio-is kt\.J Phil.
ii 1 (after affairs WH. have et tjs KOivuvla irvevfiaTOS, et ns <rir\&yxi>a ical olKTtpp.ol).

VI. xin]

DE SACERDOTIO

173

"iroieiadai ra? StaT/H/Sa?. 624. 'E^a) Be fieiSidcaq, Kat Tt <rvfi/3a\<T0ai, efajv, ri Si <re ovrjaai Svvi)crofjjzi irpos rocrovTov Trpay/iaTtov oyicov ; a\\' eireihr) coi tovto t)Sv, ddppei, w <f>i\rj Ke^aXtj1 rov icaipdv yap, icaO' bv av e^fj croi twp eiceWev cppovTiSav dvairvelv, icai Trapeao/jxu ical 5 ·jrapa/caXecrto, /cal twv et? Bvvafiiv rrjv i/jLrjv eWebtyerai ovSev. eVt tovtok trKeov eiceivos Zaicpvaa<; dvioTaraf eya> Se avrm trepi^vdel';, real /caTac^tX^o-a? rrjv Ke<pa\r}v, irpovirefi/nov, irapaKaK&v yevvaiw; <f>epeiv to o-v/x.fteftrjieo';. TI uneven yap, ecf>r)v, tco tcaXeaavrL ere H.pio~T<p, ical Tot? 10 IBioa eTriaTTjcravri, TrpoftaTOis, on rocravTTjv eic Trjs Siaicovias TavT7j<s tevqaj) irappijcriav, a>? ical 17/4S9 Kara Trjv rjaepav eiceivrjv KivSwevovras ets rrjv altovibv crov Segacrdat, CTKtfVrfV.

6 eXXei^ei giklrstwz henr eXXei^w xy

4. w <t>l\i) jce^aXi)] For this form of salutation cp. ad Theodorum lapsum I 1 1 A, II 42 A : also /ce^oX^s = ' person ' at iii 5 (note).

12. r9jv iifUpav iic.~\ the day of judgment.
13. els rty al. ...om/inj*] Lk. xvi 9 (e/s ras aluvlovs aK-qv&i WH.).

APPENDIX.

THE BEARING OF THE SCRIPTURAL QUOTATIONS IN THE DE SACERDOTIO ON THE TEXTUAL CRITICISM OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

It is admitted by all critics of the text of the New Testament

that the quotations in the writings of St Chrysos-

in Chrysos-
tom's writings attest the 'Syrian 'or
'«' type of

t°m are derived from a text substantially identical

w;th fa^t represented by the ' Syrian ' group of

, . . 'L TT

,,, ,

authorities. Dr Hort wrote1: a glance at any

tolerably complete apparatus criticus of the Acts

or Pauline Epistles reveals the striking fact that

an overwhelming proportion of the variants common to the great

mass of cursive and late uncial Greek MSS. are identical with the

readings followed by Chrysostom in the composition of his

Homilies. The coincidence furnishes evidence as to place as

well as time ; for the whole of Chrysostom's life, the last ten

years excepted, was spent at Antioch or in its neighbourhood."

From the abundant quotations in the voluminous works of

St Chrysostom, and in the fragments of Theodore of Antioch

and Mopsuestia, and of Diodorus of Antioch and Tarsus2, Dr Hort

concluded that "the fundamental text of late extant Greek MSS.

generally is beyond all question identical with the dominant

Antiochian or Graeco-Syrian text of the second half of the fourth

century3."

A study of the quotations in the de sacerdotio corroborates the

Ouotations in general conclusion of Dr Hort. They are taken

the ' de sacer- from a ' Syrian ' type of text, as we might have

dotl°-

expected, on d priori grounds, in a genuine writing

of St Chrysostom.

1 Introduction to the New Testament, p. 91. 2 See de sac. i. 1 (notes on 0(\oi and Stdao-KoKots). 3 Introduction to N.T., p. 92.

APPENDIX

175

Most of the biblical references in the de sacerdotio (for which see Index II.) merely contain allusions to passages of Scripture without quoting the exact words. They are thus of no value for the purpose of textual criticism. Of the remaining passages the following seem to be the most serviceable for that purpose.
I. Examples of Syrian readings. 1. 2 Cor. xi. 3 (see p. 58, 18 and note). (pojiovpat. yap, (prfiriv, pi) na>s, as 6 8<f>is JZvav i^Tinarrja-ev, ovtio (pSaprj T(i vorfpara vpa>v djro rfjs dwXorrjTos 7"ijj els tov Xptarov. Here we note the following points : (a) The omission of the words ev rfi navovpyia airrov after ei~r)rtaTj)<rev seems peculiar to Chrysostom. (6) ovtcd is a Syrian reading, attested e.g. by K M Thdrt. It is omitted by NBD. (c) an-6 rijs AjrX....Xpi<rTov is Syrian. It is attested by KM Thdrt, and omitted by NBD. 2. Eph. vi. 12 (see p. 30, 6 and note). oiiK (fTTiv ijplv J) Traki) irpos atfia Kai adpKa, dXXa. ..7rpdff tovs KOfTpOKpOTOpaS TOV (FKOTOVS TOV al&VOS TOVTOV. The addition of tov almvos is Syrian (K Thdrt). The words are omitted by NBD. 3. 2 Tim. ii. 25 (see p. 36, 1 and note). pf]7roTf 8<w aiirols 6 Oeos effiyvaHTiv aKrjdeias, Kai dTraWayaxrt rr/s tov Sia/iokov irayib'os. The form 8w is found in K : 8<ui? in NACD. The reading iiriyvwrw d\r]delas ko.\ dnaWayao-t kt\. for perdvoiav els iiriyvaxnv dXrjdeias Kai dvavrjyffaxTiv e'ic ktX. seems to be Otherwise unattested. II. Examples of Western readings. Jn iii. 5 (see p. 55, 14 and note). el yap oil bivaral ns elarc\6e~iv els ttjv jiao-ikeiav tS>v oipavav, eav prj &' vBaros <al jrvevparos dvayevvrjdj} kt\.
The readings (a) tS>v ovpavav for tov 6eov, and (6) dvayevvrjBfi for yevvr)6r), are Western : see Westcott and Hort Notes on Select Readings, p. 75 (in Introduction to N.T.).
III. New readings, apparently due to Chrysostom's practice of quoting from memory.
(a) Matt. xxiv. 45 (p. 27, 20 and note). ris apa 6 7ri(rros SoOXor Kai (ppovipos ov KaTaoTr)o~ei 6 Kvpios airrov e'jri TT)V o'lKiav airrov;

I76

APPENDIX

c'»rl ttjv oIkiov is otherwise unattested, though eVl rrjs oiKias is not without authority.
(6) Jn xv. 24 (p. 102, 14 and note). el iiij ra tjrjfid'ia iirolovv iv avrots a firjfteis aWos cnolrjaev, Afxaprtav
OVK l)(OV.
There seems to be no other evidence than that of Chrysostom for the reading <rr)peia.
(c) 1 Cor. ii. 11 (p. 31, 23 and note). ovftels yap 010V ra rod avdpanrov, ft fxrj to nvevfia tov avBpatnov to (V avra. If this be a quotation from, and not merely a paraphrase of Scripture, the reading oiSels yap for n'r yap must be noted as having no other support. The number of quotations from the New Testament which are Evidence on a to be found in the de sacerdotio and which furnish larger scale material for the purpose in hand is thus not large : Homilies of and to deal fully with the question of Chrysostom's Chrysostom. text 0f the New Testament it would be necessary to travel considerably beyond the present treatise, and to examine his many other writings, especially his Homilies on St Matthew and on the Pauline Epistles. This is, strictly speaking, somewhat beyond the scope of the present Appendix ; but it may be of interest to refer to the results of the most recent research into the wider question of which this Appendix forms a part, viz. the text of the N.T. as it appears in Chrysostom's writings. The evidence has been recently collected by Dr S. K. Gifford1, and his conclusions may be stated as follows2 : 1. Chrysostom often has readings which are peculiar to himself. 2. He has several readings common to him and to the most ancient authorities, especially MSS. of the Western type. 3. He knew and approved many readings which are also found in N° and D1*, and (among later MSS.) KL. The following observations (a) and (d) refer to (1) and (2) of these conclusions respectively.

1 In a dissertation, published in the Dissertationes philologicae Halenses, vol. 16, pt 1 (1902), and entitled, ' Pauli Epistolas qua forma legerit Joannes Chrysostomus.'
2 Gifford op. tit., p. 77.

APPENDIX

177

(a) If Chrysostom has readings which are not found elsewhere, the explanation of this may be sought in the fact that Chrysostom, as is natural with a preacher, often quotes from memory, even in his written treatises. See examples from the de sac. under III. above.
ip) A more important question is raised by Dr Gifford's second conclusion ; viz. the question of the date of the ' Syrian ' recension. Dr Chase has said 1 : " Chrysostom's comparative silence on the subject of variations of reading seems to be an indication that he regarded the question of text as authoritatively settled." From this he infers that the Antiochian text was regarded as in a manner final, and that discussion was regarded as needless.
On the other hand Dr Chase also refers to certain survivals of curious pre-Syrian readings, and sometimes of early traditional readings, oftener Western : and we have seen that Dr Gifford has adduced fresh evidence to the same effect. It therefore seems unsafe to conclude that the ' Syrian ' recension had already taken place in Chrysostom's lifetime2. Dr Gifford seems, according to the evidence which he has himself collected, to be nearer the truth when he places the ' Syrian ' recension somewhat later, and certainly not before the end of the fourth century3.

1 Chrysostom : a study in the history of biblical interpretation, p. 83. 2 As is assumed, for example, by Dr J. O. F. Murray, in Hastings' DB (Extra Volume, p. 213): "the Traditional Text was in existence in substantially its present form by the middle of the fourth century." The Traditional Text is the same as that which Dr Hort calls Syrian, and Chrysostom is its best representative {ibid., pp. 212--3). * Gifford op. cit., p. 69 : colligendum est in Oriente, saeculo quarto exeunte, multis locis Novi Testamenti nulla modo certam lectionem fuisse, sed variantes lectiones exstitisse non paucas. Licebat igitur episcopo et doctori qualis erat Chrysostomus ex dubiis ipsi eligere, neque ullum vesti gium percipimus auctoritatis certae et constitutae ad quam applicare se oporteat, sed sententia loci solus est discrepantiarum arbiter. Dr Gifford also refers with approval to Nestle, who remarks (Einf. N.T., p. 121) that the same writer would not always have the same copy of the Bible before him.

N. C.

INDEX I.

SUBJECTS.

Aaron, ioo, 7; ioi, 13 Abraham, 24, 10 Absolution, sacramental, xxi; 31,

23; 54 sq-
Aegean sea, 00, 15 Amalekites, wars with Israel, 99, 8 Ambition, danger of, 49; 67 Ambrose, St, xxix; 9, 18 (note) Andrathagius, tutor of Chrysostom,

2. 7
Angels, present at the Eucharist,

H7

r,,

Anthusa, mother of Chrysostom,

5 sqq-; IB2< 2*

Antioch, the home of Chrysostom,

3, 2; 32, 14 (note): fondness of

its inhabitants for theatres, 4, 14

(note) : the wealth of its Church,

45. 3 (note): St Paul in, hi:

behaviour of churchgoers in, 128

Aristophanes, imitation of, xxxiii

Arius, 114, 17; 115, 14

Asceticism, 28, 17; 68, 23; 77, 17

Augustine, St, 9, r8 (note); 19, 1

(note)

B

Basil, ix : his identity, xxxiv sqq. : 2, 2 ; 13, 10 etc.: reproaches Chry sostom, 12 sqq.: his courage and modesty, 41, 8 sqq.: begs Chry sostom to help him in his bishop ric, 172
Benedictine editions of Chrysostom, xliii, xlvi
Bengel, J. A., his edition of the de sac. described, xliv
Bernard, St, xxix

Bishops, their office and duties, xxiii sqq. : minimum age of ap pointment, 9, 16 (note) : dangers of unworthiness, 65 : resignation of sees, 65, 20 : unfair deposition, 66 : danger of ambition, 67 : need for self-repression, 68 : danger of a passionate temper, 71 : care needful in offering advancement, 76: election, 77, 3 (note): care of widows, 83, 23 : care of virgins, 84, 1; 88, 16: judicial duties, 84, 2 ; 92 : charge of finance, 85, 1 : hospitality a duty, 88, 1 : ex pected to visit their flocks, 93: right of excommunication vested in, xxvi ; 94, 22 : ought to be able to speak with authority on points of doctrine, 116: ought not to neglect public opinion, 157: severi ty of their punishment in case of failure, 160
Bride of Christ (the Church), 58, n
Carterius, tutor of Chrysostom, 2, 7 Chalice given to the laity, 52, 7 Charity, its efficacy, 40 Christ commands Peter to ' feed
His sheep,' 26, 12 Christians, 32, 14; 46, 17; 66, 17;
67, 1; 115, 1 Chrysostom, St, his life, ix : relations
with Basil, x ; 1 sqq. : writes the de sacerdotio, xi sqq. : his views on the priestly office, xvii; 51 sq.: on the Holy Eucharist, xviii-xxi ; 52 : on Penitence, Confession, and Absolution, xxi: on punishment

SUBJECTS

179

of heretics, xxii : on the office of the bishop, xxiii sqq. : replies to Basil's reproaches, 17 sqq.: his real reason for avoiding conse cration, 44, 6 sqq. : denies the charge of vanity, 49, 14; 60, 7 : the faults of his character, 61, 21 ; 70, 18; 163: promises to help Basil, 173 City of God (the Church), m, 14 Confession, xxi Conscience, accusing voice of, 94, 12 (note) Controversy in the Church, 65, 13 Corinthians, 32, 12 Cottabos, possible allusion to, 3, 9

Euelpides, D., his edition of the de sac, xlviii
Euripides, alluded to, xxxiii Euripus, type of human instability,
79. TM Excommunication, a duty of bishops,
xxvi ; 94, 22
Fasting, 28, 16; 68, 23; 150, 11 ; 151, 10
Fathers, the, on Pastoral Theology, xxix sqq.
Fraud, pious, xi; 19, 1 (note) Funeral ceremonies, attended by
excesses, 91, 17

D
Dathan, 56, 14 Deception, when justifiable, xi ; 17,
20; 19, 1 (note) Demosthenes, the force of his style,
xxxiv; 120, 7 de sacerdotio, circumstances which
led to writing of, ix sq. : date of, xi sqq. : contents of each book of, xv sq. : quotations from, xvi: references to, xvii : illustrations of Chrysostom's views afforded by, xvii sqq. : its relation to de fuga of Greg. Naz. , xxx : its style, xxxii sqq. : editions and text of, xxxvi sqq. Diodorus, tutor of Chrysostom, 2, 7 Diibner, Fr., edits the de sac. etc., xlvii Ducaeus, Fronto, his edition of Chrysostom referred to, xl
Egyptians, 24, 13 Eli, 99, 25; 101, 14 Elijah, 24, 4; S3, 4; 146, 22 Epicureans, 121, 17 Erasmus, referred to, xxxvi Euagrius, friend of Chrysostom, 1,
1 (note) Eucharist, Holy, xviii sqq. ; 52, 5
(note) : the giving of the Chalice in> 52> 7 (note): presence of the Holy Spirit in, 53, 12: presence of angels in, 147

Genuflexion at the Eucharist, 148, 5 Gnosticism, 113, 17 Greeks, polytheists, 112, 21 Gregory the Great, xxix
II
Hebrews, 29, 1 r Heresies, to be combated by preach
ing, "3 Heretics, persecution of, xxii High Priest, compared to Christian
Priest, 51 Hoeschel, David, referred to, xxxvii Holy Spirit, invoked at the Eu
charist, 53, 12 Homer, quoted or referred to,
xxxiii Hospitality, a duty of bishops, 88, 1 Hughes, J., his edition of the de
sac. described, xli Hydra, popular applause likened to,
'39- 6
Ignorance, cannot be taken as an excuse for failure, 104
Isocrates, the polish of his style, xxxiv; 120, 6
Israelites, 24, 14
Jealousies, among fellow-priests, 62, 3
Jerome, St, xxix

i8o

INDEX I

Jews, monotheists, 113, 1 Judas Iscariot, ioi, 22 Judgment Day, 107, 26
K
King, inferior to priest, 48, 5 (note)
Leo, Ae. E., edits the de sac. after Bengel, xlvi
*> Libanius, tutor of Chrysostom, 2, 7 Lomler, F. W. , edits the de sac. etc. , xlvi M
Manichaeans, 113, 2 Marcion, 113, 18 Martin of Tours, St, 9, 18 (note);
48, 5 (note) Maximus, friend of Chrysostom,
1, 1 (note) Medicinal art, use of deceit in, 22 :
methods employed in, 109 Meletius, of Antioch, 2, 7 Metaphors, frequent in Chrysostom,
xxxiii -Migne's Patrologia Graeca, text of
the de sac. in, xlvii Miracles, ancient and modern, in,
6 (note) Misappropriation of funds, 157, 14 Monasticism, xiii; 77, 17; 150 Monk, contrasted with priest, xiii;
68; 69, 3; 150 sqq. Monks, settlements round Antioch,
H9. 3 Monnica, 8, 10 (note) Montfaucon, Dom Bernard de, his
edition of Chrysostom described, xliii sqq. Moses, 100; 113, 17; 146, 22
O
Ordinations, forced, 9, 18

Paul of Samosata, 115, 5 Penitence, xxi Persecution, its expediency denied,
3*. 14 Persuasion, better than force, 32,
19; 35. " Peter, St, 26, 10; no, 20 Phinehas, 24, 2 Pirkheimer, Wilibald, referred to,
xxxvi Plato, the sublimity of his style,
xxxiv; 120, 8 Popularity, not to be sought in
preaching, 136 Prayers for the departed, 146, 20 Preaching, its importance, no Priest, dignity of his office, xvii:
compared to a shepherd, 26 ; 60, 5; 85> I2: his responsibilities, 29; his need of gentleness, 32: his need of judgment, 33 : magni tude of his office, 50: the Christian contrasted with the Jewish, 51; 56: compared to a father, 57: compared to a general, 59 : to be supported by the contributions of his flock, 59, 6: compared to a navigator, 60: danger from wild beasts (sc. passions), 61, 21: dangers of unworthiness, 64 : sets an example to others, 72 : motives in selecting, 77: in rejecting, 81: qualities requisite, 83 ; m; 127: responsible for the sins of his flock, 141 : danger of sensuality, 142 Promised land, denied to Moses, 100, 23 Proverbial expressions, 4, 5 (note)
R
Rejection of candidates for ordina tion, 81, 20
Rescius, Rutgers, referred to, xxxvii Resignation of bishops, 65, 20

Passionate temper, dangerous to a bishop, 71
Paul, St, converts the Jews, 23, 16: his character and work, 58; 117 sqq.

Sabellius, 114, 16; 115, ri Samuel, 99, 1 Saul, 21, 4; 29, n; 98, 15 Savile, Sir Henry, his edition of
Chrysostom described, xxxviii sqq.

SUBJECTS

181

Secundus (father of Chrysostom), 6, 3 (note)
Self-examination before ordination, i°3
Seltmann, C., his edition of the de sac., xlviii
Sensual temptations, 141 Similes, frequent in Chrysostom,
xxxiii Sirens' island, 61, 13 Sophocles, possibly reierred to,
xxxiii Stephen, in, 1 Stoics, 113, 3 (note); m, 17
Theatre, its attraction for the Antiochenes, 4, 14 (cf. 22, 2)
Theodoras, bishop of Mopsuestia, 1, 1 (note)
Thirlby, S., edits the de sac. after Hughes, xlii
Thucydides, the dignity of his style, xxxiv; 120, 7
Timothy, admonished not to ordain without examining, 104, 24: ad monished to preach carefully, "3. 7
Titus, admonished to preach care fully, 123, 19
Trinity, doctrine of the, 115 Tyrrhenian sea, 60, 15

U
Unction, sacramental, 57, 19 Unworthiness, a bar to the ministry,
49
Valentinus, 113, 17 Vergil, possible reference to, xxxiv Versatility, required in the priest,
in, 16 Verses, found in de sac., 26, 14
(note) Virgins, bound by vows of chastity,
84, 1 : difficulties involved in their oversight, 88 sqq.
W
War, use of deceit in, 19 : the life of the Christian compared to, 30, 12; ill, 12 ; 167 sqq.
Widows, maintained at Church's expense, 83, 23: the bishop re sponsible for, 84 : their faults, 85, 16
Women, their influence in the Church, 62, 18
Word, power of the spoken, no sqq.

INDEX II.

SCRIPTURE TEXTS.

xxii xxvii

GENESIS

iii. 11 iv. 10
14 xi. 2 xxxii xxxiii. 11

EXODUS

iv. 3 14
xxi. 9

LEVITICUS

24, 10 24, 12

xxxvi. 6 lxxxvii. 3 cvii. 42

PSALMS

100, 15 too, 15 100, 16 24, 13 100, 8 ioi, 16
160, 15 160, 15 160, 23

xv. 1 xviii. 19

PROVERBS

JEREMIAH iii- 3

iii. 17 xviii. 23 xxxiii. 11 xxxiv. 17

EZEKIEL

116, 12 112, 14 46, 17
70, 20 16, 14
34. «
141, 24 80, 20 80, 20 161, 12

NUMBERS
xi. 15 xii. 3 xvi xx. 7-12 xxv. 7

100, 19 101, 15 56, 14 100, 20 24, 2

iii- 27
ii. 11 iii. 2

DANIEL AMOS

73, 18
160, 11 160, 9

DEUTERONOMY

xxii. 21

161, 2

I SAMUEL
ix. 2 xix. 11-18 xx. 5 sqq

29, 11 21, 4 21,6

iv. 8, 9

WISDOM

46, 20

ECCLESIASTICUS

iv. 8 10
ix. 13 xviii. 15-17

86, 8 28, 18 16, 8 87, 9

SCRIPTURE TEXTS

183

MATTHEW

iii. 10 v. 11, 12
13 14 19 22 ix. 16 xiii. 22 xviii. 6
18 xxii. [I xxiv. 45
51 XXY. 24
30

90, 1 67, 6 '48» « 148, 16 124, 20 70.8 ·'·' 34. 9
146, 6 141, 9 54. 10 148, 14 27,20:36,4 98.9 159, l8 108, 13

ix. 48 .

MARK

xii. 42 xiv. 28 xvi. 9

LUKE
27, 20; 36, 4 108,8 173, 13

i. 13 18
iii. 5 16
v. 22 vi. 53 xii. 6 xv. 13
22, 24 xx. 23 xxi. 15

JOHN

56. 4 27, 14 55. :5
n.
54, 20 55. '7 102, 2 42. 3 102, 13 54, 18 26, 11

vi. 1-6 ix. 15
22 23 29 30 xiv. 12 xvi. 3 xvii. 18
34 xx. 9
3' xxi. 20

ACTS in, 2 125, 3 120, 18 "9- 2
119, 2; 120, 19 120, 20 121, 22 23, 16 121, 16 «'< 8 121,10 "5. 3 23, 15

viii. 32 «· 3 xiii. 10
14

ROMANS »7. 14
59' '5! "9. '4 40, 21 55. n

I CORINTHIANS

»· 3

58. 21

11

3'. 23; 75. «

vii. 4°

7. 3(n-)

viii. 12

141, 12

ix- 14. >5 20

59.4 23, 18

118,22

x- 24, 33 xii. 26 ..

59. 7 75. 10

xiii. 3

40, 22

5 xiv. 34

59- 7 63, 8

xv. 31

59, 2; 118, 24

II CORINTHIANS

i- 24 |i- 7 iii. 10 viii. 20 X- 5 xi- 3
16

32. " 94. *6 52. 3 1 57. 16 22, 15 58, 18 17, 11

26 28 29 xii. 2 20 . xiii. 3 .

59. »; 59, 1;

18, 21 18, 22 18, 22 18, n 3°. 15 95. i*

ii. 11 20
iii. 27 v. 2
19

GALATIANS

1 21, 7 14*. 13
55, n ^3. 17 3°. 15

EPHESIANS
3°. 6
PHILIPPIANS

"·4 iii- 7

59.7 n, 19

i. 24 iv. 6

COLOSSIANS
108, 20 111, 11; 124, 5
124, 8

1 84
i. 2 19
iii. 1

INDEX II

I TIMOTHY

104, 15 92. 21 66, 9

i. 7-9 ii. I4

TITUS

133, 20 27, 16

w. .Vrf ::::::::::::::::::::: .^ I xiii- i7

V. 17 22

"4. 13 104,25

II TIMOTHY

V' '4

i. 1 '" \\ ... 25 111. 14, 15
16, 17

i°4> *5 "§' " 3°.i '^3. 13
123, 15

iii- 15 8

95> i3; I+I> 5

TAMTTO JAMES

57' '7

I PETER
»o, 22; 124, .0 8o ,, *y

INDEX III.

GREEK WORDS.

d/9a<raW<n-a>s 131, 3 <J|Sw<ros 61, 2; 71, 21 ; 81, 2; 116,
11; 159. ' dyaBtlrrwros 2T, 13; 97, 23 d7apdKT77<ri? 87, 1 , djyaTnjrAs 37, 18; 67, 18; 71, 19 a77eX«<5s" 118, 18; 142, 10 d7c\oioj 80, 2 d>A7> 10, 13; 27, 4; 31, 2; 37, 1 ;
48, 15; 78, 15; 88, 18 ayuurrela 53, 3 ayuaaivq 89, 8; 91, 3; 155, 7;
164, 24 d'ypiafj'ea'^ai 155, 26 d7pufl-Wa 28, 17; 68, 23; 89, 17 ;
150. " dytf/ivaoros 154, 1 dyx'i'ota ir2, 16 doap.dvri.voi 73, 12; 138, 4 iS^Kaaros 83, 3 d5id\ei7TTOs 118, 21 dSeTeiK 89, 21 dBXtrrucSs 109, 2 aflXiirijt 162, 13 d$p6os 34, 16 &8p6ws ( = suddenly) 5, 3; 17, 1;
22, 6; 34, 1; 81, 22: ( = abundantly) 85, 1 dOvppa, 170, 12 alperiKos 114, 12 draTayiixun-os 139, 4 dx4patos 7, 18; 20, 15 ; 91, 2; 109,9; 155. 9 dmJpwTos 171, 5 d/iis 168, 19 dulxyTos r58> 20 d/t\ti'i)s 126, 4; 152, 13
aKOLVU)VT]TOS 1 64, 5
dxoXatrla 163, 20 aKo\ov(Ha 51, 5 d(c6pe<TT0S 85, 3 duparos 22, 9; 23, 2 d/c/>i/3o\o7«<T0ai 50, 19

dXafora'a 144, 22 ; 156, 3 dXaXcry/iis 168, 13 d\o>os (of animals) 29, 13 dXowrfa 150, 12 dXt/eu' 132, 5 dp.e\eTijo-la 153, 19 d/iOi/MiV 151, 9 d/.U'0/Mi" 165, 22 acaStfecrSeu 98, 20 dccuoeiWtfai 86, 21 (it's) avtuptiv ( = to answer) 75, 17 Araurxvvreir 86, 4, 18 ; 88, 24 dparetirtfai 43, 1 1 avaKdwreiv 17, 9 dj'a/fi57TTeti' 4, 4 dyaXyTjo-fa 34, 19 avakieiv 17, r6 dra/ta/)T^7-ws 46, 10; 97, 10 dvaveOetv 100, 16 dvaTriirTetv 73, 2 &i>ap,ptirlfe<T0ai 144, 9 deaa KTjtrLa 153, 25 dj'a<T7rai' 158, 8 dVeXetf(?e/>os 62, 6 dve^Taaros 35, 8 dve^txaKta 81, 3; 85, 14; 134, 6 aVefka/cos 87, 14 dveiraLadrrrox 170, 18 dyeTriXijTTTOs 130, 15 dpefl-fTrXaaTos 143, 19 oVeiri7-i)5«os 50, 10; 78, II avepn6.Tt.aTos 17, 2 dvttidvvos 18, 1
d^^KOOS 10, 5
dvrifiepos 139, s; 167, 13 dvidaSat 1 32, 5 dvoKWxh 17 1 1 15 direwd7eii' 16, 7 dVu7r65i;Tos 70, 4 dpw Kdrw 63, 5; 71, 6 di-ai/taXia 135, 10; 151, IO dfi6ir«rTos 69, 8; 77, 12 dolKrrros 119, 2

1 86

INDEX III

aopaala 16S, 8 dirayye\la 1 20, 1 1 awaye 24, 15; 55, 11 iirayxovlfeaBai 70, 3 aircuSi vffla 17, 11 d-jraKpiplovffOai 7, 10 AirapatTTp-os 91, 21; 142, 2 d7rapacd\euTos 155, 9 dirapidfieiv 144, 9 d7rewxoXeii' I2I> I2 a.iraT&J)v 24, 17 a7rei/)aT0S 138, 25 d7re\ir£fcu' 68, 10 direpUpyoi 151, 15 direpvOpiav 34, 19 dTnJveia 6, 16 071-17x1)5 30, 12; 67, 21; 171, 9 &ir\affTO$ 144, 8 (X7r\6T7;s 97, 21 dxXfit 2, 5; 14, 11; 15, 9; 34, 6;
39> r4! 45. '4! 46. 5; 00. 5; 64. 20; 69, 19; 70, 8; 80, 2; 84, 10; 93. m 94. 9; io5> ifi; '»7> *; 13°. 24 diroyiyml><TKeu> 34, 1 ; 35, 24 aTrbyvuiffis 35, 3 du-Ayoxos 24, II awoyvfivodv 165, 21 avoSeiv 54, 4; 59, 20; 101, 17 dirodoKLfid^eiv 81, 16 dirodieffBai 37, 10; 72, 10; 88, 26;
94. 7 airttKpTjfivos 35, 16 iiroXa/i^dveiv 115, 8; 164, 10 aTrovlTTTe&dai 103, 1 dTroyoia 13, 13; 35, 2; 41, 15; 43,
16; 48, 3, 7; 49, 6, 11; 50, 20; 58, 4, 8; 71, 7; 73, 4; 95, 17; 116, 21 ; 126, 11; 144, 25; 163, 18 diroirii&S.i' 11, 8; 13, 7; 97, 13; 107, 15; 108, 4 diropeiv 22, 14; 28, 2 ; 36, 23; 154, 19 aTroaKiWeiv (not found in present) 143. 12 aTTOOToXucos 75, 10; IOI, 23; 117, 16; 125, 7 O7ror(/CT«C 5, 4; 131, 13 dwoTivdaaeiv 23, 8 aTOTO/da 33, 16 OTroT/jAjraioj 167, 23 dirpaypLotyvvT} 153, 24 dirp6'tros 164, 4 dTpcxTTdrevros 91, 10; 143, 22 fy&ji' 53. 2I

dpiceur0<u 21, 20; 30, 11; 31, 4; 39, 1. 8; 159, 13
dppay/is 5, 1 dfytiurTeui 21, 24; 93, 12 dppwffria 31, 13, 22 apx^Tviros 72, 1 d/>xiKos 83, 2 cw-tKijs 61, 15; 112, 18; 142, 24 do-re?? 36, 5; 91,8; 119, 25; 138,
16 do-zojiris 14, 5; 109, 4; 153, 20 dffOyyvdjffroi 93, 4 curvmvfflaffTos 164, 5 dirxdWco" n, 3 dffXeros 6, 1 1 do-xwaTioTos 143, 21 aVxvweu' 84, 13; 137, 4
dtrxvwfov 62, 3
dV(i/utros 139, 1 droreTv 137, 2 dVoiros 11, 4; 18, 5 ; 48, 11 ; 78, 20;
80, 8; 116, 23; 145, 5; 162, 1, 9; 165, 8 &TV<pOS 83, I aiBevria 66, 10; 116, 20 a{i<TTT)p6TT)i 143, 12 aurapKela 91, 15 aiiTtirdyyekTos 107, 13 oi>t6k\77Tos 105, 5 auro/ioXeiv 77, 7 aiTou^eix 151, 12 afrrovpyla 92, 8 aux^a" 143. r9 dffiaros 26, 18; IOI, 5 dtpeivai Kardwiv 2, 4; 166, 8 dtptivtu (TrXoiOK) 17, 3; 18, 14 dxpelvai tptdvfjV 59, 18; 162, 6 djpopfiJ/ 91, 15; 95, 1; 108, 11 axaxi)s 165, 10 oxMs 168, 8
fidSuris 143, 6, 20 /3a<riXeJa 48, 5, 9, 18 ; 55, 14 ; 98, 1 3,
18; 99, 26; 142, 9 /3a(riXiKos 88, 18 pa.ffKO.vla 16, 8; 73, 23; 76, 6, 7;
81, 12; 130, 21; 134, 11; 138, 1; 163, 18 0atf}ij 143, 8 f}e\Tl<0ffis 99, 15 fitful 147, 18 |3i«Ti/cos 4, 5; 8, 16; 49, 22; 79, 19; 106, 21; 145, 20; 149, 1; 154. 23

GREEK WORDS

1 8/

p\aKefeu> 72, 19 fipafielov 20, 14 ppieew 45, 18 flptiuv 41, 2
ydwatiat 87, 6; 132, 6 ytevva. 55, 20; 70, 8, 9; 80, 18;
119, 14 ytXws 46, 16 yetfeo-Sat 45, 8
y\lxeo~6ai 66, 6 yvdjpiafux. 40, 23 7oijTeia r68, 5
da.lp.oves 24, 6 SaLfiovtK6s 57, 3 Sairvfiiiv 148, 15 oa7rai'ai' 77, 18 Sai/'iXiis 93, 26 SeSlrTeaBai 104, 22 ae'7^0 26, 9; 42, 14; 48, 23; 152, 1 deiva, 6 81, 15; 93, 25; 105, 16 Sriixbaiov 6, 15 SijpuyreX'ris 76, 17 Siat-io\iKus 141, 21 Sia-ywyii 151, 6 5idfeu£is 129, 10 diaSpvXetv 158, 16 SidBpvtpis 143, 5 Stalpeiv ard/xa kt\. 46, 6; 62, 15 StdfcXacris 143, 6 5ia*cpoiJe(r0cu 136, 9 StaKvplepvav 152, 14 SidXe|is 128, 3 Smirrieiv 12, 2; 45, 3; 48, 11; 56,
23; 154, 16; 158, 3 iiaaT-qfw. 1 66, S 8ia.Ti84vai 70, 17 fiiax«0"0cii 34, I 1 8i«5tJs 70, 18 Siiireiv 14, 8 SiepevvaoSai 35, 9; 39, 17; 67, 17;
74, 1; 83, 20; 104, 5 Siefipwyds, to 34, 9 Str)veK^s 73, 13; 143, 3
(5tfctt<T7lKOS 84, 2
Ji/tJlK 33, n; 148, 16; 157, 2 8topart/c6s 68, 17 Siox^'O'S'" 138, 19 SiXOTop-"" 98, 11; 108, 14 Sopvqiopeiv 148, II 5oi/Xo7rpe7refa 144, 22 SouXoirpeTnJs 62, 9 Siva/uv, els 48, 4; 99, 24; 173, 6

dvedpearos 21, 23; 88, 12 5i/ff(aTos 155, 25 SwrT/HlirfXoy 21, 24 SvffTvxeiv (with accus.) 7, 17 Swxctpbrros 16, 4 Sv<rx^peta 84, 2; 158, 21; 164, 10 SuvwirelaSai 9, 10 Sw/x&Tiov 22, 19

^yyopos 24, 10

£yym;T77s 105, 12 iytcaXivdeio-flai 14, 1 eyKaX6wTe<rdai 117, 10 ^yxeib-fltu 9, 11 $ 22, 8 eyKtifuov 129, 22; 133, 8; 136, 9

^7X«P'f«" 54. 21 riXocpu'ijs 133, 21; 142, 21 elp.apu.iv-q 113, 3 elpwveieaSm 71, 13 riaxw,u<£feu' 79, 17; 88, 20; 138, 15 eKplaiveiv 57, 4 £Kpd\\ea8ai 22, 15 &/3a<ris 119, 9 (K^pdaaew 169, 4 (KK\riala ( = the building) 65, 13 ^kwXtjktos 133, 8

inTpaxyXlfeiv 62, 5 e^piireaBai 13, 7; 35, 15; 151, 18 iK<p4peiv, 49, 1; 70, 13; 94, 16 ex<popd 91, 17

Adrrc«jp.a 153, 22 AXAyijuos 135, 1 ^u/SdXXeic tis iyop&v 5, 1 ;
90, 10, 11 (lifidTebeiv 26, 15 cpLirprifffiSs 74, 20 tfitpoptlada.1 22, 10; 23, 8 IpuppaTTtui 85, 5; no, 16

12, 8;

^ayi;* 56, 14

barrier, els to 50, 16 &>6x^,;<Rs 85, 22 ^7-eu{is 86, 6; 163, 21 i^evfiapl^eiv 69, 16

*l« 35. 2 ^fiordxai 53, 18

i^oyxoOffffai 131, 22; 144, 25 O-OKiXXeiv 34, 5 ^foXurfldi'eu' 89, 10 (}u$ev 13, 3; 15, 21; 17, 18; 18,

6; 32» i6; 39. i6i 42. 19; 45. 4. 9; 79- '3; 92> '6; 94. 14; "o. 13; 116, 6; 118, 10; 119, 25; 128, 7; 136, 1, 4; 138, 17; 145, 7; 151, 4; 162, 2

i!

INDEX III

iopri) 76, 17 twayyiXKcadcu 89, 2 (ira0\ov 28, 9 ^7rd\\7;Aos n 8, 21 iiraxSris 26, 1 ^7retff dyeiv 7, 4 ^7reX0<5p, rd 131, 4 ew4paffros 135, 20 7T7;pe<£feu' 121, 5 iwypela 6, 15; 11, 12; 17, 6; 69,
18; 90, 16; 146, 9; 157, 4 iinfipWeiv 3, 12 iTlSefffios 34, 2 ^x(5o<rts 56, 19; 69, 8; 145, 19 £iriKOv<t>i£eiv 86, 16 ^irixeiieu' 9, 14 tiriffK-fyrTetv 41, 12; 123, I iirttrKtafrti' 41, 11; 74, 12 imffKOTij 76, 23; 93, 11; 156, 15 iirlffKOTTOS 82, 2; 91, 23; I23, 19 (lTL<TKOTeiv 133, 20 iinaTaala 10, 12; 26, 16; 61, 18;
69, 2; 78, 14 iiriCToidfriv 114, 13; 116,20; 123,24 iin<7Tp4(j>ei.v 6, 13; 34, 14; 131, 19 £iri<rTij(pew 130, 6 i-mrifila 34, 7 iwlrpi/ifia 143, 7 £iri<pavda. 146, 8 t7rt0iW0cu 14, 9; 134, 8 ^"·v^i 5. 9
^peirxeXfa "6, 5 ipvBpiav 42, 17; 104, 10; 130, 7 ei)a-y?js 76, 12 eiapW/airos 16, 12; 145, 9 e{iyv(ijfx6vus 19, 6 eOyviOfioffdvij 40, 10 euSietvos 139, 9 (vHoKL/Mrjffis 8, i ; 9, 7 ; 163, 19 cie£ia 108, 23; 109, 2; 150, 16 eveTypla. 147, 4 ei-opepelv 133, 23 drifiepla 62, 4 eiffeiat, i% 24, 20 ei)0eias, Art 156, 7 eidvvat 18, 1 ; 92, 4 ; 93, 22 ; 95, 8 ;
107,26; no, 10; 141,3 ebKa.Ta<pp6vr)Tos 129, 12; 138, 25 eipup^s 130, 17 evod/j.la I43, 10 eMXiirtfos 156, 13 einraQela 151, 5 evirpd&tTos 86, 7 eiipepa 128, 19

Effpiiros 79, 12 eforw/ictTeu' 163, 7 e&rpiup'fy 37, 1 ev<pTjp.la 136, 4, 8 etfx^pwos 37, 19; 163, 2 ixOptoS&s 27, 15
foipiiSijs 168, 8 f«n"5s 3. 9; 10. 24; 34, 3 fw7/xi0os 135, 14
^kw, r6 ye ek cfii (kt\.) 16, 2 ; 64, 7; cp. 142, 21
i}\iaK6s 74, 5 TjfUffelas, <?j 41, 5 V/"* 34. 13; 81, 23; 97, 21 ijipe/ifa 51, 12; 72, 14; 81, 7
^TTO 121, 2
0au/iaTO7roi6s 151, 1 0avpuiTovpyeii> 118, 9; 121, 2 Seoi/ 158, 25 6eni\wi> 108, 8 8e6ri)S 115, 10, 17 depairaiva 88, 22 OepairevrtKds 83, 3 dijparpov 143, 17 floXow 70, 18 06/>u/3os (of mental distress) 12, 1 Optp.ij.aTO. 26, 20; 31, 4 6vpe6s no, 14 BvaiaaTT-qpioi' I47, 18; 148, 4 0W7re(a 62, 6; 93, 18; 144, 22
Idiwrela 124, 2 IdldlTTIS 117, Ii; 119, 23; I20, I,
3, 5, 14; 121,20; 123, 3, 23; 135, 3; 150, 6; 160, 16; 161, 2 15iwtik6s 72, 12 Upaa&ai 66, 25 tepanffos 79, 6 ; 93, 2 iepuativri 9, 16; 38, 26; 48, 8; 51, 1 ; 63, 16; 64, 4; 70, 2; 76, 12; 78, 18; 98, 14; 99, 26; 107, 2; 150, 4; 160, 25 Uerripla 53, 13; I47, I [Xiyyiav 69, 23; 154, 20 Xva = idv 14, I lovSatfreiv 121, 7 laoariususv 3, 5
KadarreffBai 63, 1 1 Kadapeieiv 61, 17; 65, 7; 67, 19;
158, 22

GREEK WORDS

189

Ka.6iffucpi.vbs 45, 3; 118, 24 Katetv 31, 17; 32, 9; no, 3 radios 17, 15; 73, 15 koLtol 7c 24, 3; 27, 1 ; 28, 16; no,
19; 112, 13; 162, 7 KCLKOvoia 42, 9 KaKafJLOffdat 45, 21 KaXd/ir) 74, 2 Kahavpoxj/ 167, 16 Ka\Xwir«r/i6s 120, 10; 144,6 Kafuvos 7, 6; 22, 17; 67, 23 KaTTT/Xefa 84, 12 Kanz fxbvas 12, II KaTaKprffivlfeiv 34, 3 KaraXX^Xos 109, 17 KOTaXX^Xws 35, 9; 109, 17 KO.ru.fj.LCKa.o0aL 138, 9 KaTaTraXaieic 120, 19 Karawiveiv 89, 9 Ka.Tap'pviralvtiv 64, 7 KaT<uTK-/)TrTeu> 86, 23 KaraiTTav 158, 12 KaTOXFTpLOfm 1 69, 2 KaTe7re£7eu' 10, 18; 91, 22; 93, 16 Ka.T7](fx:La II, 10; 14, 2 kotottiv aipe ivcu 2, 4; 1 66, 8 Karop0ovv 19, 15; 69, 1; 7*> '75
117, 9; 118, 4; "5. 9; I3«» 2» 150. 9 Karbp$wp.a 19, 12; 74, 11; 97, 17; 119, 7,13; 129,14; 131,2; 133,27 Kaiawv 87, 11 Kevodo&iv II, 8 KeyoOp 80, 3 Ke0aX7) 56, I (n.); 173, 4 KexPVCT0al = Xpy°~0cu 25, 2; 81, 5; 99, 15; 116, 23; 158, II Ki)Sepu>vta 84, 1 ; 155, 15 KlbapiS 51, II kXi7/4cit£s 73, 20 kXtjpos 78, 22; 155, 19 kMSuv 4, 5; 6, 9; 159, 13 Koivbv, rb 10, n ; 70, 5 Koivbs 151, 15 Kcupanu/cfc 83, 2 Koifilfctv 163, 9 /coXoxeia 45, 13; 89, 6; 93, 18; 156, 22 *6Xa| 149, 9 (c6Xo<ns 44, 1 KopvLpaios 26, 10 Kopv<povadai 82, 21 Kbfffltos 150, 19 upacns (atpuv ktK.) no, 2; 151, 9 (tporciK 152, 14; 154, 15

upbros 129, 14; 130,2; 135,8; 136,
8
KWOLOV 51, IO KLoKvfia 82, 26
Xei<$T?;s 120, 6 XeiTovpyia 12, 6; 37, 12; 62, 20;
78, 87 105, 15; 160, 24 XevT&yeus 35, 16; 137, 13 Xijiox 45, 19 \L61vos 154, 3 \oyiKbs 29, 14, 21 \oyio-p.bs 14, 13; 46, 4; 67, 12; 82,
5; 144, 14; 145, 4; 162, 17; 163, 13 X670X, els (c. gen.) 54, 5; 56, 22 XvpLalvetrdai 84, 22 \vpLeuv 85, 1 1 XiVis 44, 13 Xirrrav 114, 17; 162, 24
fiayyavela 168, 4 /taXdcnreiv 156, 22 fiavixbs 166, 13 /xai/ia.«7)? 115, 16; 157,24; 169, 19 pLO.pfia.pvyj) 167, 8 juaTcuoTroWa 45, 9 fidxaipa. no, 14; 151, 2 M*7«M"ttfe 85, 10; 129, 13; 130,
l8; I44, 21 p.ip&KLOV 167, 15 p.ep.^lp.oipos 85, 3; 157, 8 M^ox, t6 29, 15; 36, 9; 46, 23; 48,
1°; 57. 1; 133. 2; 150,6; 170, 15 fieTaWiKbs 155, 18 /^Taxeiptfeix 64, 5 p.erpui^eiv 40, 13; 41, 8; 68, 1;
'53. 9
/^XP'(s) 27, 8; 29, 20; 43, 15; 60, 19; 80, 7 ; 84, 6; 89, 22; 94, 23; 108, n; 130, 18; 141, 3; 146, 8; 166, 20
p.i) (for 06) 9, 7; 25, 2; 73, 22 fJLif ijTl 46, IO p.r]S' o\us 50, 9
iwcpofvxia 40, 3
fjucT&apvia 45, 13 puabreKvos 153, 3 pirpa 51, 11 funfaiifp 166, 11 jUoXii(Tyu6? 64, 8; 142, 24 Moxdftix 78, 13 Moxax<5s3, 7; 145. 8; I49-3! I5°>3!
151. 5; 152, 75 !53> 13; 155. 8 fwr-qpris 1 54, 12

190

INDEX III

povoyep-qs 27, 14 pMvov o&xt- 61, 18 pdvuxrii 72, 13; 143, 23; 155, II poxXeieoBai 16, 15 fivpiaywy6s 60, 13 Hvorijpiov 148, 9
"2A»a 31, 19 ""P"; >37> 9 vavfjL&xris III, 20; 167, 3 J>eo0l/TOS 46, 22 veuTeptKos 3, 12 vyaTeia 28, 16; 68, 23; 77, 18;
150. 11; 15'. 10 vi)<p6Xios 68, 16; 150, 19 "#«« 73. 13; 143. 3! '55- 8 voootroibs 64, 24 j'UffTdfeti' 117, 18 vwBpos 68, 19 vw&pdrTjs 69, 2
fevoiraSeic 83, 22
07*05 (of style) 120, 7 dSOvr} 89, 15 otSalveiv 72, 4 oIkIokos 69, 4; 152, 23; 164, 4 oUodofiiKds 104, 7 oUovopla 23, 23; 25, 3; 26, 5; 66, , 25; 85, 9; 92, 13; 102, 2; 108,
18; in, 3; 154, 4; 155, 3 oltcovop.uc6s 87, 15 olorpos 57, 3 6kvtipos 84, 17 6Xi7<Jt?;s 145, 12 6ixiKt)tik6s 164, 8 ipurfpu/ioyeip 2, 13; 10, 20; 76, 24 bp.ora.y-!)s 67, II bpo\f/vxos 15, 21 opoipos 152, 23 optpavia 6, 6; 7, 17 oi (for /at}) 19, 1 oiala 115, 14 b>pOa\pi.o<pavQ$ 1 70, 8
Tra^na 46, 16 iraides (in periphrases) 22, 5 iraidoKTovla 24, 10 TraiSorpiptis 109, 3 TraXaieiv 152, 20 7raXai(rrpa 154, 5 ira\iyyeve<rta 56, 6 Trap.tpd.yos 73, 23 TTOI'I'UX^ 91, 17 Trm-reuxfa 171, 17

7rapa (because of) 19, 3 Trap' oitbiv 20, 1 irapa t»> apxty 41, 18; 46, 6; 57, 13 Trap^ei? 44, 18; 83, 6; 105, 2, 9;
106, 3, 14 Tra.pa.K[i&£uv 89, 19 irapa/cWfetc 152, 10 irapaKoXovdelv 2, 6 TrapaXXaTiJ 115, 14 irapaXoytfecrdai 21, 6 irapairaletv 48, 11; 1 58, 2 Ko.pa-xtTa.o-pM. 23, 1; 72, 13; 153, 21
7rapa7rXr)f 165, 9 -irapairXri^la 22, 12 ; 48, 13; 102, 19 iraparelveiv 76, II jrapeloSvois 156, 19
-irapevSoKt/ieiv 138, 6 7rapevr)flepei<r8ai 138, 2 irap$4i>os ( = under vow of chastity)
84, 1; 88, 16, 22, 26; 90, 9; 91, 19; 92, 11 wapoivia 1 00, 6 Trapo^ivetv 71, 16; 85, 23; HI, 1; '34> 15 irapovoia 122, 10 ·jrapuffeiv 50, 10
war-ftp ( = bishop) 11, 6 ireoax 3, 10; 145, 20 7T6i/>aTTJs 82, 12; 112, S irepLfid\\«r8ai (mid.) 62, 14; 63, 3;
77, 5; 149. 6 weplpoXos 70, 2; 112, 13 weplSaKpvs II, 16 Trepit\K(v 8, 17 irepiepyd^eoBai. 91, 9; 116, 8, 14;
162, 14 wepiepyos 1 20, 10 irepLKaKeZv 35, 24 TrepiKeiffdai 74, 14 TepiKe<pa\ala 167, 8 irepLvociTety 93, 10 Tepiovala 16, 19; 87, 3, 23; 161, 4 Tepiotioios 27, 17 Trepnreipetv 113, 13 Trepnrl-iTTeiv 49, 15 irepWTOixffeii' 73, 23; 144, 10; 149, 17 irepa-tpveiv 23, 16 Trepupp&TTetv 142, 18 -nepixapiis II, 20 Trepidjfl-T) 30, 14 TT^TaXoc 51, 11 ttjktIs 167, 16 irlo-aa 73, 20 -KiareieaSai 29, 5 vKao-TiyZ 3, 9

GREEK WORDS

191

aXiypa 143, 7

n-Toeiffflai 4, 15

irKiov 16, 22; 164, 3 ir\eoj<<ifei!/ 86, 23; 87, 23; 159, 20

TTTw/ia 170, 9 7jrwxei5«" I2°> I2

irXeoveKTeiv 29, 8; 122, 3 T\r)piu\ei¥ 95, 5 irXty dXXd (=dXXd) 4, 9 7ri/?yos 23, 8

_pq.Bv)ieiv 156, 17 jjairffeiy 80, 5 j>i.TrTa> 42, 8 /Soifos 71, 10

TroiKiXia 109, 16 iroiKlXos 75, 15; 86, 22; HI, 13;
H3. 9; '49i 7. 8; !7'. 2 iroXid 46, 21 ; 78, I1

pOlUKOt 51, 10 fro/upala 142, 3, 5
po*i 7, 7
pvBfd^iv 136, 13

xoXireJa 89, 1; 116, 13; 125, 17
XoXXoOTOS I46, 12 iroXujiii)xa,'os 91! '^

118, 17;

pi>/«j 70, 19 piffl-fix 143, 19 pinrovv 143, 2 puris 108, 25

TnAvrpay/xovtiv 23, 5 iroXirr^Xeio 143, 8

ffefJLVOTTJS 120, 8

xoXi5rpo7ros 107, 22 iroveiaStu ( = Tovelv) 2, 9; 26, 18;

ffi^LKiv&lOV Il8, 7 (7/tai'SaX(feii' 59, 5; 91, 4; 160, 5

132, 19 jrovripeieirBai 134, 14

<ricj)i'i) 4, 14; 22, 2; 173, 14 (TKijvoTrot6s 45, 1

iropiffTiicSs 88, 7 irocr6T7;s 93, 25 irpaypuTela 35, 20; 78, 4; 98, 7 irpeo-fleia 24, 12 irpoaipeiadax 44, r

07C1J7TTOS 80, l8 (7/cia/xax£a 42, 21 ffKiprav II, 8; 33, 9 (TKXripayuiyla 68, 24 <TKop7rffetv 87, 24

Trpoalpeais 3, 5; 19, 2; 23, 16, 22; 24. 9; 33. 4! 34> 8; 44> 6: 87>

iT7rai' 23, 7 (T7r(Xos 108, 25

25; 108, 3; 119, 10

ardSiov 42, 10; 154, II

irpoavatpeiv 158, 15

ffreipovadai 89, 18

irpopdXXeffflai 107, 3; 141, 17

<rreipwa*is 89, 22

irporryoi/ievos 39, 6 irpoXapfiavtiv 65, 20; 97, 3 vpoix.r)vieiV 141, 21 irpo£e>'ei>' 67, 6; 126, 13 irpot-evos 77, 3; 127, 6 wpoTeT-tp 150, 19 Trpofipifros 158, 8 7rpo<ratTeti' 86, 20 Trpotrdeiffdai 34, 12 irpoaeSpetieiv 4, 14; 30, 13; 89, 9 -Trpoff^XoOo'^at 5, 1 irpoa-rpiifi 34, 20; 83, 2; 86, 7; 87, 5

ffreppos 152, 13 aTc<pavovy 33, 5; 119, 5 oroxafeffOai 34, 8 tXTparTjyta 48, 5; 142, 8 (XTVtnreiov 73, 21 (Tiry/card/SaiTis 149, 19 avyKo.Ti.ivai 149, 10 <TvyKpoTi<rdcu III, 13 a-VKotpavre'iv 41, 15; 75, 9; 94, 19 trvKoipavria 17, 5 <ruXXen-oup7eu' 62, 3; 75, 4 avpLirXoKrf 116, 3

irpoakffBai 22, 1 ; 83, 8 wpoffiraffiis 65, 8 Trpoaraala. 70, 14; 79, II, 16} 84, 1 ;

oitx-nTWim 29, 18; 131, 12 <rvvel8T)<ns 141, 12; 148, 10, 19;
164, 16; 170, 19

92, 20; 93, 8, 19; 100, 10, 14; 153. »3. '9 TrpoaraTeicaSai 147, 8

oweto^y, to 94, 12 aivTovos 28, 17; 73, 12; 150, II ffvffKid£eiv 1 30, 1 1

irpoarplfieaBai. 93, 18; 116, 22

atpakepds 145, 2

irpoaunrtiop 22, 2 irpoffawov ( = iirooracrtj) 115, 14

a<j>pi.yS.v 37, 1; 163, 7 axoLviov 151, 2

TpoTpotr^i 99, 15 irpo&TTOt 60, 4; 104, 15

ffx°Mi 78, 18; 101, 16 ffU/uaTO^>i;Xa| 75, 3

192

INDEX HI

rapdeiov 20, 3 rairetvov&dai 131, 12 Ta7TlVO(ppoailVTJ 62, 11 Teixo/^&XVS 1'Ij 20 rtXeov 34, 15; 102, 21 rt/ireu> 31, 17; 32, 9; 95, 3; no, 3 Tepdanos 40, 18; no, 15; 121, 3 TepareveadaL 61, 13 Tepdpda 119, 25 rt/iOK 13, 16; 44, 1; 47, 1; 81, 5 HHWgla 44, 1 TMVnj 33- 17. x9 rpay<pdla 169, 6 rpi/vaj- 45, 21 rvtftovffdai 48, 20 tuxui', 6 15, 13; 40,4; 49, 2; 64,8;
72, 23; 92, 12; 109, 5; 131, 1; 134. 1; I38. 4
#|8pis 17, 6 byialveiv 16, 19 i/io#e<r/a 56, 7 i/AcmiJ 164, 3 virepa.KOVTifcu' 28, 14 inreppXrifav 45, 19 itripoyKos 3, 3; 146, 4 VTTepOTTTlKOS 86, 1 iirepajfila 29, 12 vwevdvvos 106, 8 viroypa<t>-fi 143, 7; 167, 1; 170, II {jTroboxfj 88, 2 ijTTOKptT^S I49, 9 i/TTOKUTTTetP I44, 23 inrbeeais 33, 13; 94, 28; 97, 20;
149, 11; 154, 13 iir6\-q\pis 12,4; 106,8; 121,5; 133,16 birOTTTeveiv 16, 18; 38, 3; 39, 12;
41, 10; 44, 15, 19; 49, 3, 5; 50, 4, 24; 128, 17; 157, 25; 158, 2 iir6<rTa<ns 116, I VTroavpew 71, n; 156, 4 £7roTd<7<7e«' 164, 1 BttouXos 149, 7 Vtttios 73, 3 ; 170, 26 ii\j/os 120, 8
0ai& 7repi/3<£\\e<r0cu 14, 2 0d\a-)<{ 167, 6 <pavT&{e<r$cu 49, 8; 51, 6 (Pavraala. 3, 12; 145, 5 <p(pwv (with a finite verb) 15, 1 ; 34, 2 (pd&veu/ (usual sense) 21, 14; 131,
12 ; i34. '5; '36, 14

<j>86.vav (without idea of 'anticipa tion') 42, 6 (?\i>-
4>8ope6s 82, 23/ <t>ika.vdpwirla 52, 12; 80, 22; 81, 2;
99, 18 ,£> %, r ipikapyvpla. 163, 19 tfiiXdpyvpos 16, 9 0iXo5o|(a 13, 13; 43, 16; 50,20; 95, 18 0iAoveut«v 2, 4; 40, 9; 151, 13 tptXoveuda. 82, 7; 153, 1 <t>i\oao(peiv 126, 16 <pc\oao(pLa (the monastic life) 3, 8:
78, 1; 89, 1 iptXoffTopyos 42, 16 tpLXrpov 166, 14 <p\eyp.alvuv no, 5; 162, 11 ^Xeyfiovifj 72, 4 0Ao£ (of fever) 22, 7 tpoivi<TKe<r8a.i 52, 7 <j>oivl(ra£iv 42, 17 (ponav 2, 11 tpopnms 26, 1 ; 69, 18 (ppevo/HXafteia 113, 18 <ppiKib5Vs 51, 9; 52, 2; 53, 17; 79,
8j 147, 9 <ppov5os 18, 9 tpvpSyv 168, 16 (pwpav 106, 2
Xa/iewfa 28, 17; 68, 23; 150, II Xapis 51. 9 ("·); 52, I X&piana. 40, 22, 24 Xio-xei" (xai-ai) tI| I3; ^ g Xaayx3o-0ai 117, 18 Xeiporovelv 10, 22; 44, 15; 101, 11;
105, 6, 7, 20, 22; 106, 10 XeipoTovla. 101, 20 X^pa 83. 23; 84. 6; 85, 16; 88, 23;
"I, 3 XnpcLa 6, 6, 7; 7, 6, 14, 16; 8, 5 XXemo-la 17, 5; 108, 11 Xopos 78, 12; 88, 19; 101, 23; no,
21; 148, 16 Xpe^riapis 167, 10 XP"n<np-eieiv H4, 8 Xpricp-iis 75, 17 XPWreve<rffai 81, I
fvt>^(x6ai 43, 17 ^?j0oe 0<?peu> 38, 8; 75, 19; 136, I
aSives 6, 5; 55, 22 &8iveiv 5, 4, 14 iis = t3cTTei8, 8; 38,12; 69,23; 107,11

CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BV JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY TRESS

n-J.
%rf*=***X
Maim

3 2044 052 821 576
r

 *a*« ek

