2 CHR YSOSTOMUS

[11

ἀληθεῖς, καὶ τοὺς τῆς φιλίας νόμους καὶ εἰδότες καὶ φυλάτ-
τῦντες ἀκριβῶς" εἷς δέ τις τουτωνὶ τῶν πολλῶν, ἅπαντας
> ‘ e , a Ν ς a t a
αὐτοὺς ὑπερβαλλόμενος TH πρὸς ἡμᾶς φιλίᾳ, τοσοῦτον
ἐφιλονείκησεν ἀφεῖναι κατόπιν αὐτοὺς, ὅσον ἐκεῖνοι τοὺς

5 ἁπλῶς πρὸς ἡμᾶς διακειμένους.

2. Οὗτος τῶν τὸν ἅπαντά

, 4 Ν /
μοι χρόνον παρηκολουθηκότων ἦν. Kal yap μαθημάτων
ς a 3 a > 4 a
ἡψάμεθα τῶν αὐτῶν, Kal διδασκάλοις ἐχρησάμεθα τοῖς
αὐτοῖς: ἦν δὲ ἡμῖν καὶ προθυμία καὶ σπουδὴ περὶ τοὺς
λόγους, οὗς ἐπονούμεθα, μία, ἐπιθυμία τε ἴση καὶ ἐκ τῶν

10 αὐτῶν τικτομένη πραγμάτων.

οὐ γὰρ ὅτε εἰς διδασκάλους

μόνον ἐφοιτῶμεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡνίκα ἐκεῖθεν ἐξελθόντας βου-
λεύεσθαι ἐχρῆν ὁποίαν ἑλέσθαι τοῦ βίου βέλτιον ἡμῖν ὁδὸν,

\ 3 a e a 2 , Ν ‘\
καὶ ἐνταῦθα ὁμογνωμονοῦντες ἐφαινόμεθα. 3. Καὶ ἕτερα δὲ

I και Tous] om και 2 || 8 και προθυμια] om και fxyz || 9 ἐποιουμεθα codd
omnes praeter cy’ (erovouyeda) et ἢ (επαινουμεθα) || 10 ovre yap ore f ||

διδασκαλου ac oliv || 12 ποιὰν g

2. εἶς] i.e. Basil (Βασίλειος), not
mentioned by name until c. 4. The
identity of this Basil has not yet
been definitely determined. It is,
however, certain that he was not
Basil the Great, of Caesarea in Cap-
padocia: see /troduction p. xxxiv.

8. τοσοῦτον κτλ.] ‘ strove as hard
to leave them behind, i.e. to outstrip
them in the competition for Chry-
sostom’s friendship. For ἀφεῖναι
κατόπιν cp. vi 12 πολλῷ τῷ μέτρῳ
κατόπιν ἀφεῖναι.

5. ἁπλῶς... διακ.) ‘who were
neutrally disposed towards me’:
that is, had no special affection.

6. μαθημάτων] Chrys. intended
to adopt the career of an advocate :
cp. τὸν δικαστηρίῳ προσεδρεύοντα
below.

7. διδασκάλοι}] Chrys. learnt
rhetoric from Libanius, the famous
sophist : and philosophy from An-
dragathius (of whom nothing else
seems to be known): see Socrates
Hi. E. vi 3, and Sievers Leben des
Libanius p. 150. His teachers in

Christian doctrine were Meletius
(then Bishop of Antioch), Diodorus,
and Carterius: Soz. viii 2.

ods ἐπονούμεθα) For the use
of the middle, πονεῖσθαι, instead of
the active, cp. ii 1 τῷ περὶ ταῦτα
πονουμένῳ, and v 5 τοῦ πονεῖσθαι
ἀπήλλακται (where it is used, as
here, of rhetorical exercises): also
Homm. in 2 Cor. 503 Ὲ ὁ γεωργὸς
δι’ ὅλον πονεῖται τοῦ ἔτου. The
accus. with πονεῖσθαι is more
common in verse.

13. καὶ ἕτερα δέ κτλ.} ‘ And other
bonds besides these remained un-
broken and secure’: i.e. besides
having tastes in common, Chry-
sostom and Basil were well matched
in respect of (a) fatherland, (4)
wealth, and (c) position. ᾿Εφυλάτ-
τετο, lit. ‘ were preserved,’ indicates
that all these bonds of union re-
mained unchanged as they grew up.
The vulgate reading (see critical
note) gives an easier construction :
but it seems to be interpolated.
